### Section

4 Chapter 1 S OILMICROBIOLOGY , ECOLOGY , ANDBIOCHEMISTRY IN PERSPECTIVE
stated that soils were classiﬁed during the Yao Chinese dynasty from 2357 to 2261
BCE. This dynasty should be recognized for both basic and applied studies of soilsas they used a soil classiﬁcation for taxation purposes. The ancient Chinese regardedearthworms “as angels of the earth.” Romans, such as Aristotle, considered earth-worms as “intestines of the earth” (Coleman et al. , 2004). Further evidence for the
early recognition of soil is that the Hebrew word for soil is “adama,” from which is
derived Adam, the ﬁrst man in Semitic religions (see Hillel, 1991). The ancient Vedic
literature of India classiﬁed soils by color (and thus organic matter content) and
recognized the importance of l and forms, erosion, vegetation, land use, and human
health implications.
Fungi were known for their fermentation reactions in wine, beer, and bread
making and also as a food source that could at times be toxic. Inscriptions onEgyptian walls from 2400 BCE show the production of beer and bread involved theuse of a starter and required an incubation time. Eastern, and later Roman, schol-ars recognized the soil-improving qualities of legumes and crop residue additions.Roman literature on agriculture and soil management was extensive. This wasupdated and condensed into a single volume by Petrus Crescentius in 1240 CE andfor many years was copied, even into the time of the printing press (e.g., RuraliumCommodorium libri duodecin Augsburg, 1471).
Knowledge stagnated in Europe for the one and a half thousand years prior to
the Renaissance at the end of the 15th century; not from a lack of intelligence, butfrom the ﬁrmly held belief that the world was governed from the outside and wasnot an object to be questioned (i.e., intelligent design). The end of the 15th centurymarked the end of the Western medieval world with the emergence of the perspec-tive that laws that govern the world are subject to study. The concept of biologicaland abiotic controls that can be studied and inﬂuenced by humans marked thebeginning of our present knowledge of the soil biota and their processes. The abil-ity to transmit this knowledge by the printed word after the invention of the print-ing press also greatly aided scientiﬁc discovery and discussion.
We are getting further away from our historical roots, an understanding of
which is so important to our thinking and ability to formulate scientiﬁc questions.The advent of the computer with its easy access to recent literature seems to delayvisits to the library to look at not only the original thinking in our ﬁeld during theearly 20th century, but also important literature from 1950 to 1980. I have tried tosummarize brieﬂy some of the important early discoveries. In doing so, I have notreferred to the original literature, but to reviews often found in textbooks thatshould be available in many libraries. The history of our science is not merely alisting of the important discoveries, but an important example of scientiﬁc thoughtprocesses and the relation between methodology, ideas, and concepts.
Our ﬁeld is still methodology-driven as shown by the great increase in knowl-
edge being derived from molecular techniques and tracers. Another methodologybreakthrough was nearly driven to excess, as shown by the fact that the three mostcited papers from the Soil Biology and Biochemistry Journal from 1975 to 2000Ch01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 4
involved the application of the fumigation technique (earlier used by Schloesing
and Müntz for nitriﬁcation studies) for the measurement of microbial biomass.Today we are beneﬁting greatly from the availability of automated techniques, theuse of computers in data transformation, modeling and knowledge dissemination,and the presence of active scientists in many new parts of the globe.
A look at our history shows how ideas were generated. It also shows that we
should look at some of the misconceptions of the past to help us clearly deﬁne ourthoughts and concepts. I realize that my biases show and that I have concentrated onthe positive. The literature is full of examples showing that many of our founders alsodeveloped some “doozies.” It would also be rewarding to look at what did not passthe test of time so that our own ideas do not end up in the same dustbin. A brief sur-vey of citations in some search engines, such as the U.S. National AgriculturalLibrary, Commonwealth Agricultural Bureau, ISI Science Citations, and BiologicalAbstracts, shows that the words “soil ecology” elicit more responses than “soilmicrobiology,” which is followed in interest by “soil biochemistry” and “microbialecology.” There are differences in relative rankings dependent on the search engines,but processes generally involve more citations than microorganisms. Soil N is mostpopular, followed by soil C, N
2ﬁxation, and the rhizosphere. The citation survey
shows that new methods of analysis are being applied to continuing problems withpollutants and pesticides and their effects on the soil population. These topics arecontinuing to receive a great deal of attention, as is soil biodegradation. If you reallywant to gain a further appreciation of our ﬁeld, try general search engines, such asGoogle, which lists 9,050,000 items for “soil microbiology,” 25,100,000 for “soilecology,” and 7,800,000 for “soil biochemistry.” An understanding of the interest inthe word “humus” would require the perusal of 4,760,000 items. This, however,includes recipes for a common Mediterranean prepared food, hummus, so maybe abetter search would be for “soil organic matter,” with 14,600,000 items.
SOIL MICROBIOLOGY
Fungi in certain forms can be readily seen without a microscope; thus, they
received early study. The ﬁrst book solely about fungi (“Theatrum Fungorium”)
published in 1675 by J. F. van Starbeck drew heavily on the drawings of Charlesde’Egeluse prepared as early as 1601 (see Atlas, 1984). In 1665, Hooke publisheda work on the fruiting bodies of fungi, and by 1724, spores were known as fungalreproductive agents. Fungus–root associations were noted by earlier authors, butin 1877, Pfeffer recognized their symbiotic nature, and in 1885, Franck coined theword “mycorrhiza.” Franck later distinguished between ecto and endo associa-
tions; a classiﬁcation that is still applicable in present, extensive literature on this
subject. In 1886, Adametz isolated fungi from soil and gave them names. The ﬁrstdetailed classiﬁcation of soil fungi was conducted by Oedemans and Koning in1902 (see Waksman, 1932). In the 1920s, Charles Thom made a detailed study ofSoil Microbiology 5Ch01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 5
soil fungi, especially Penicillium and Aspergillus , the dominant soil fungi on most
agar plates. Waksman also published extensively on soil fungi and actinomycetes.
Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723) is recognized as being the ﬁrst to see bacteria in
his self-designed microscopes. He observed the small animalcules in natural waterand in water amended with a substrate (pepper or meat broth). The comprehensiveclassiﬁcation system produced by Linnaeus in 1743 perhaps foretold the moderndifﬁculties in bacterial classiﬁcation when he placed all the organisms seen byLeeuwenhoek in infusions of vegetable matter and meat broth into the genus Chaos.
In 1776, Nagelli (see Atlas, 1984) suggested that bacteria be placed into their ownclass entitled Schizomycetes. The work of Warington, Lawes, and Gilbert estab-lished the biological nature of many of the processes involved in N transformations,especially those involved with the growth of leguminous crops. Pasteur (1830–1890),in discrediting the theory of spontaneous generation, laid the foundation for micro-biology. Although trained as a chemist, he developed vaccines for rabies and inves-tigated many food microbiology problems. Pasteur and Liebig had both postulatedthat the process of nitriﬁcation was bacterial in nature. While studying sewagepuriﬁcation by land ﬁlters, Schloesing and Müntz found that the ammonia contentof sewage passed through a sand ﬁlter did not alter for 20 days. After this period,ammonia was changed to nitrate, but the process could be stopped by a small amountof chloroform. The process could be restarted by soil extract, thus proving that thisprocess was due to microorganisms or, as they said, “organized ferments.”
S. Winogradsky (1856–1953) is recognized as the founder of soil microbiology
for his contributions to nitriﬁcation, anaerobic N
2ﬁxation, sulfur oxidation, and
microbial autotrophy (Winogradsky, 1949). He succeeded in isolating two bacterialtypes involved in nitriﬁcation with the keen insight that they obtained their C fromCO
2. He thus also established autotrophy in microorganisms. In the period 1872–
1876, Cohn published the ﬁrst comprehensive study of the bacterial content of soil.Hellriegel and Wilfarth, in 1888, grew peas in the absence of a ﬁxed N supply, show-ing that legumes obtained their N from the atmosphere, whereas oats did not have thiscapability. They knew that the peas had nodules, but could not isolate the bacteriawithin. Beijerinck, in 1888, isolated the bacteria that he called “ Bacillus radicicola ”
(now usually called “ Rhizobium ”). This showed the dependence of the N cycle on
bacteria. The N cycle was completed when Goppelsröder observed that nitrates werereduced to nitrites in the presence of soil organic matter. In 1868, Schoenbeinascribed the reaction to bacteria and Gayon and Dupetit further developed the knowl-edge that led to denitriﬁcation studies.
The latter half of the 19th century saw more details on microbial processes includ-
ing symbiotic and asymbiotic N
2ﬁxation, denitriﬁcation, and sulfate reduction and
oxidation. The research on fermentation led to the delineation of anaerobic metabo-lism. Waksman, in his 1952 textbook “Soil Microbiology,” gives a detailed accountof the early contributions and also published photographs of many of our academicforefathers in soil microbiology. His 1932 book gives detailed historical referencesin each of the chapters, as well as a listing of the textbooks on the various topicsto that date. He gives credit (together with Winogradsky) for the foundation of soil6 Chapter 1 S OILMICROBIOLOGY , ECOLOGY , ANDBIOCHEMISTRY IN PERSPECTIVECh01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 6
microbiology as a discipline to Martinis Beijerinck (1851–1931), who not only
extracted the ﬁrst viruses from plants, but also isolated many N 2-ﬁxing organisms and
developed enrichment techniques. Basic and applied sciences were as intertwinedin the beginning of our science as they are now. Winogradsky and Beijerinck are alsorecognized as founding members of microbial physiology and microbial ecology.
The ﬁrst textbook to include soil microbiology was that of Löhnis, “V orlesunen
über Landwirtschaftliche Bäkteriologi,” published in 1910 and 1913. English readerscan gain an insight into its contents in the English version he published togetherwith E. B. Fred in 1923, entitled “Textbook of Agricultural Bacteriology.” Thattext contains very readable accounts of bacteria, fungi, and protozoa and a gooddiscussion of relationships of microorganisms to their environment. J. G. Lipman(1874–1939), who established the Department of Soil Chemistry and Bacteriologyat Rutgers University in 1901, was especially interested in the effects of soil organ-isms on soil fertility and plant growth. His 1911 book entitled “Bacteria in Relationto Country Life” was the ﬁrst American treatise in this ﬁeld. Waksman (1952)named the period from 1890 to 1910 as the Golden Age of soil microbiology whenrepresentatives of the soil biota carrying out the major soil and biogeochemicalprocesses were identiﬁed. The identiﬁcation of at least representative members ofthe microorganisms mediating soil fertility and nutrient transformations led to thebelief that this knowledge could do for agriculture what the identiﬁcation of majordisease organisms did for medical treatment.
Successes in legume inoculation led to several premature attempts to alter soil
C and N transformations by inoculation and to relate microbial numbers to soilfertility. This discussion continues to this day in the many questions concerningbiodiversity and ecosystem functioning addressed later in this volume. The attemptsto inoculate bacteria, other than symbionts, and control microbial pathogens ofplants were seldom successful because of the lack of knowledge of microbialecology and the other controls involved. These studies did, however, help transferattention from pure cultures and laboratory investigations to ﬁeld experiments andthe need for replication to account for soil heterogeneity. This period also containedthe interesting conclusion that if an organism did not grow on a gelatin or agar plate,it could not be important and thus was not worth studying.
The years from 1910 to the Second World War witnessed the employment of
soil microbiologists in numerous new institutions in many parts of the world. Thisled to a better knowledge of the global distribution of, and management effects on,organisms capable of growth in the laboratory medium. The development and useof direct microscopy led to the realization that approximately only 1% of the soilpopulation could be grown on laboratory media. The failure of inoculants, exceptin the case of symbiotic N
2ﬁxation, to create meaningful management effects was
a worry at that time. It is only now that we realize the huge number of unidentiﬁedorganisms and that the unknown interactions between them and their environment(ecology) explain the often observed lack of impact of introduced organisms.
It was at ﬁrst assumed that bacteria were the major players in soil fertility and
decomposition as typiﬁed by the books of Löhnis in 1910 and Löhnis and Fred inSoil Microbiology 7Ch01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 7
1923. In 1886, Adametz showed that fungi are abundant in soil. Additionally,
Hiltner and Störmer had studied actinomycetes, which at that time were thought
to be different from the bacteria. Cutler had studied the protozoa, and Russell andHutchinson developed the theory that by consuming bacteria, protozoa could con-trol the soil population and, thus, soil fertility . The early te xtbooks took as much
license with their titles as modern ones. The Löhnis and Fred publication on agri-cultural bacteriology included extensive sections on the protozoa and fungi dis-cussed under sections such as “Bacteria and related microorganisms.” Waksman’s
“Soil Microbiology” included sections we would today call biochemistry. The effectsof environmental factors on the rate of soil organic matter decomposition weredescribed by Waksman in his 1932 book entitled “Principles of Soil Microbiology”and the Waksman and Starkey 1931 book entitled “The Soil and the Microbe.”
The period between the two world wars saw work on microbial interactions and
nutrient transformations. Fred, Baldwin, and McCoy’s 1932 comprehensive volumeon “Root Nodule Bacteria and Leguminous Plants” set the stage for the continuedsuccess in symbiotic N
2ﬁxation. The C:N ratio required for plant-residue decompo-
sition without N immobilization was determined as approximately 25:1, a number that
is still appropriate unless large amounts of poorly degradable residues are involved,as in forest litter. Attempts to measure many of the microbial processes in soil werefrustrated by the inaccuracy of the measurement techniques relative to the large stockof nutrients in soil. Waksman (1932) commented that it was difﬁcult to measure N
2
ﬁxation by free-living organisms at levels less than 40 lb per acre, which was (andstill is) the inherent error in the Kjeldahl or other methods of measuring total N. TheFinnish scientist A. I. Virtanen received the 1945 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for hismajor contributions to legume nutrition, especially the role of rhizobia in symbioticN
2ﬁxation. Lie and Mulder (1971), in “Biological Nitrogen Fixation in Natural and
Agricultural Habitats,” provide a record of the many advances made in that ﬁeld.
The Second World War led to a concentration on the war effort. This was, how-
ever, not without its success as witnessed by the use of the fungal antibiotic, peni-cillin, and the development of streptomycin, for which Waksman received theNobel Prize in Medicine in 1952. The war also resulted in studies to overcome foodspoilage and rotting of clothes, as well as the beginnings of biological warfare inboth preventive and causative formats. Alexander’s 1961 and 1977 “Introductionto Soil Microbiology” continued the general organization utilized by Waksman inhis earlier volumes. He organized the section on the soil environment and bacteria,actinomycetes, fungi, algae, protozoa, and viruses into a section entitled “MicrobialEcology” and recognized the multitude of microbial and microbial–plant inter-actions. The 1960s saw an inﬂux of new scientists that worked on symbiotic andasymbiotic N
2ﬁxation, S cycling, the rhizosphere, mycorrhizas, and the effects of
herbicides, pesticides, and pollutants on the microbial population. The mycorrhizalhistory to 1969 can be found in Harley (1969). The use of 
15N and alternate sub-
strates and inhibitors for speciﬁc enzyme interactions made possible for the ﬁrsttime the quantiﬁcation of the processes in the N cycle at the levels that they occurin soil. However, method availability still hindered testing of concepts regarding8 Chapter 1 S OILMICROBIOLOGY , ECOLOGY , ANDBIOCHEMISTRY IN PERSPECTIVECh01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 8
microbial populations and diversity, and it was not until the advent of nucleic acid
methodology, automated biochemical measurements, such as phospholipid fattyanalysis (PLFA), computers, and modeling that the great thrust of knowledge cov-
ered in the subsequent chapters of this volume could come to fruition.
V olumes on soil microbiology include Subba Rao (1999), “Soil Organisms and
Plant Growth,” 4th ed.; Killham (1994), “Soil Ecology;” Lynch (1983), “SoilBiotechnology;” Metting et al. (1992), “Soil Microbial Ecology;” Alef and
Nannipieri (1995), “Methods in Applied Soil Microbiology and Biochemistry;”Van Elsas et al. (1997), “Modern Soil Microbiology;” and Sylvia et al. (2005),
“Principles and Applications of Soil Microbiology.” Other volumes include Tate in1994, “Soil Microbiology;” Harley and Smith in 1983, “Mycorrhizal Symbiosis;”
Read et al. in 1992, “Mycorrhizas in Ecosystems;” and Makerji, Chamola, and
Singh in 2000, “Mycorrhizal Biology.” A community and ecosystem approach to
the biology of soil is presented by Bardgett (2005) and the role of microbial diver-sity as a supplier of ecosystem services is presented in two edited volumes(Bardgett et al. , 2005; Wall, 2004).
The advances in molecular techniques utilizing culture-independent direct
retrieval of 16S rRNA genes have allowed an examination of the occurrence andbiodiversity of microorganisms. A survey conducted by Morris et al. (2002)
examined the primary scientiﬁc literature from 1975 to 1999 in 525 journals.Figure 1.1 shows data for six soil-associated habitats.Soil Microbiology 9Number of publications per year
Y ears1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000100
80
60
40
20
0
FIGURE 1.1 Publications per year from 1975 to 1999 in microbial diversity: ( ◆◆) fungal–plant
pathosystems, ( ▲) rhizosphere and mycorrhiza, ( ▲▲▲▲) microbial habitats in soil, ( ◆) aquatic systems, 
(—) bacterium plant systems, and ( ■) food microbiology (Morris et al. , 2002).Ch01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 9
Fungus–plant pathosystems outnumbered the other ﬁve habitats and showed a
10-fold increase in papers; however, that number peaked in 1996. The rhizos-phere, including mycorrhizas, was still rapidly increasing in popularity in 1999.Microbial habitats in soil showed a similar trend, as did aquatic systems.
Molecular techniques hold great promise for increasing our understanding of thelinks between organisms, processes, and the environment; thus soil microbiology,biochemistry, and ecology are best treated in one volume. The recent ﬁnding ofammonia-oxidizer genes in previously immeasurable Archaea is one example ofnew functional groups and maybe even new functions and processes that will bediscovered by the readers of this book.
SOIL ECOLOGY
Soil ecology is the second leg of the scientiﬁc tripod supporting this textbook.
Ecology has numerous deﬁnitions. The one that applies to this text is the interactionof organisms and their environment. Smith and Smith (2001) stated that Haeckeldeveloped the term “ecology” in 1869 from the Greek term “oikos,” meaning homeor place to live. The ﬁrst ecological publications are credited to the Greek scholarTheophrastus (371–288 BCE), who wrote nine books on “The History of Plants”and six on “The Causes of Plants.” Continued work by naturalists during the 15thcentury, especially in the Middle East, was followed by the plant geographers,such as Wildenow (1765–1812) and V on Humboldt (1769–1859). These describedvegetation by physical type and environmental conditions and coined the word“association” (see Smith and Smith, 2001). More plant geography, such as that ofSchouw, who studied the effects of temperature on plant distribution, and Paczoski,who studied microenvironments created by plants, led to the study of plant com-munities. Scientists such as Coulter, Bessey, and Clements developed concepts ofsuccession and gave ecology its hierarchical framework (see Major, 1969).
Aquatic research contributed much to ecological theory. In 1887, Forbes, who
interestingly had no college degree (see Hagen, 1992), wrote the classic “The Lakeas a Microcosm,” which was a predecessor to ecosystem ecology and introducedthe concepts of interrelationships through food chains. In 1931, European biolo-gists Thieneman and Forel used the concept of organic nutrient cycling and devel-oped the terms “producers” and “consumers.” In 1926, agronomist Transeau wasinterested in improving agricultural production through a better understanding ofphotosynthetic efﬁciency and initiated our understanding of primary production.The early ecologists tended to concentrate on native plant and animal associations,whereas at that time soil microbiologists were associated with either agronomy ormicrobiology departments. Agronomists were primarily concerned with cultivatedﬁelds and the processes therein. To the soil zoologists, these ﬁelds seemed depau-perate of interesting organisms, while the ecologist’s obsession with native sites,and to some extent the environmental movement, was thought by the agronomiststo greatly limit their interpretive capability.10 Chapter 1 S OILMICROBIOLOGY , ECOLOGY , ANDBIOCHEMISTRY IN PERSPECTIVECh01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 10
Ecosystem science, a term coined by Tansley in 1935 (see Hagen, 1992), led to
a more experimental approach and interdisciplinary work. The textbook organizedaround the ecosystem concept, “Fundamentals of Ecology” by E. P. Odum (1971),went through three editions and was translated into more than 20 languages. TheInternational Biological Programme of the 1960s and 1970s demonstrated the needto investigate all the interacting components of the ecosystem and to model themusing mathematically deﬁned transformation processes. This required the activeinteraction of soil microbiologists and biochemists with plant and animal ecologistsand agronomists. During this program, G. M. Van Dyne, a strong advocate of theecosystem concept, described the editor of this volume as standing on a four-strandedbarbed wire fence between ecology and agronomy, with the warning that someday I would slip, with the obvious drastic consequences. The title and chapters inthis book indicate to me that this fence has ﬁnally been ripped out. Future greatadvances lie in the study of our exciting ﬁeld by scientists with a variety of back-grounds and employment in institutions often as heterogeneous as the soils andorganisms they study. At the same time, the more classically trained ecologistsrecognize that the soil, with its multitude of interacting organisms and complexityof interactions, is the last great frontier of ecology.
Today’s researchers are ﬁnding that replicated, managed ﬁelds are excellent for
studying and developing ecological and biogeochemical concepts in that theyoften have greater, more easily measured, nutrient ﬂuxes than those in perennialvegetation. Uncultivated systems, whether prairie or forest, are essential as referencepoints, often with greater diversity. Other work, such as that in the Amazon Basin,is recognizing that many of the forests that were once thought to be pristine havehad major past human interventions.
Russell’s 11th edition of “Soil Conditions and Plant Growth,” edited by Wild
(1988), noted that Gilbert White, in 1777, observed that earthworms were promotersof vegetation by perforating and loosening the soil and drawing leaves underground.Feller et al. (2003a) note that Darwin ﬁrst reported on the effect of earthworms in
1837, followed 34 years later by the publication “The Formation of VegetableMould through the Action of Earthworms.” At that time, the term “vegetable mould”was used to designate surface horizons in a manner not that different from the ear-lier use of the term humus. Darwin showed that earthworms were important in soilformation by affecting rock weathering, humus formation, and proﬁle differentia-tion. This led Feller et al. (2003a) to credit Darwin for the ﬁrst scientiﬁc publica-
tion in Europe on the biological functioning of soils. In 1839, Ehrenberg hadshown the presence of soil protozoa (see Feller et al., 2003a). Russell’s work on
partial sterilization and its beneﬁts to fertility had involved the protozoa. Cutlerand Crump, in 1920, observed the often reciprocal increase and decrease of amoe-bae and bacteria and attributed the concept of soil sickness resulting in loweredfertility to this phenomenon (see Waksman, 1932). This is in direct contrast toRussell’s, and more recent, concepts in which faunal-derived microbial turnoveris considered an advantage in nutrient release (Coleman et al. , 2004). Stout et al.
(1982) gave a detailed resume of the soil protozoa that included the slime molds.Soil Ecology 11Ch01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 11
The “Manual of Agricultural Helminthology” (Filipjev and Shuurmans-
Stekhoven, 1941, published in The Netherlands), summarized nematode anatomy,
systematics, methodology, and plant–parasite interactions to that date. G. Steiner
states in the edited volume on nematology (Sasser and Jenkins, 1960) that the Incasof Peru had a regulation by which the replanting of potatoes on the same landneeded to be deferred by a few years to control what must have been golden nema-tode infestation. He also stated that the “bush culture” that involved burning of trop-ical forests followed by planting of crops was not done on adjacent plots to stopinvasion of nematodes from the old agricultural plots to the new ones. Kevan’s 1965description and count of soil fauna per square meter of a European grassland werequoted in the ﬁrst edition of this textbook. A good introduction to the various mem-bers of the soil fauna is given by Burges and Raw (1967) and is updated by Lavelleand Spain (2001) and Coleman et al. (2004).
Wilde (1946) stated that the principals of soil science and ecology were intro-
duced to silviculture by the German forester Grebe in his doctor’s thesis in 1840.Grebe forecast Dokuchaiev’s studies by stating, 
“As silviculture horizons widen, the importance of environmental conditions
becomes more sharply pronounced. It appears clearly to foresters that the formof forest management is determined by a number of physical inﬂuences relatedto topography, geology, type of soil, and climate.”
In not mentioning organisms, maybe the quote does not belong in this book, but
80% correct isn’t all bad.
Russian scientists have long credited Dokuchaiev and his associate Kostytchev
with being the founders of soil science and for having a great inﬂuence on ecology.Wilde (1946) quotes Dokuchaiev as saying,
“The eternal genetical relationships that exist between the forces of the envi-
ronment and physical matter, living and nonliving domains, plants and animalsand man, his habits, and even his psychology—these relationships comprise thevery nucleus of natural science.”
Dokuchaiev recognized the effects of animals in soil formation in using the word
“crotovina” for the ﬁlled-in remnants of mammal burrows. Russian soil science,ecology, geography, and plant ecology have always been closely associated (Major,1969). Their word “biogeocoenoses” emphasizes the biology–landscape inter-actions, as well as exchanges of matter and energy, discussed so often in this text.Hilgard translated Dokuchaiev’s work to English and mapped American soils rela-tive to landscape, climate, and vegetation. Wilde credits Hilgard’s 1906 publication“The Relation of Soils to Climate” for perhaps unintentionally laying the foundationof soil ecology in America. The interactions of Dokuchaiev’s ﬁve factors of soil for-mation, climate, parent material, organisms, topography, and time were reiteratedand placed in an equation form by Jenny (1941). Liebig has been credited as one ofthe ﬁrst physiological ecologists for his work on mineral nutrition of plants.12 Chapter 1 S OILMICROBIOLOGY , ECOLOGY , ANDBIOCHEMISTRY IN PERSPECTIVECh01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 12
The inﬂuence of Müller’s 1878 monograph in characterizing forest soils in rela-
tion to the type of organic matter (Mull, Moder, and Mor) has been extensive. Wildelists an extensive number of European authors who emphasized the role of soils inforest management. Other reviews on forest–microbiology–nutrient cycling includeJordan (1985), Pregitzer (2003), and Morris and Paul (2003). Rangeland science isequally dependent on soil processes, some of which are detailed in “Grasslands,Systems Analysis and Man,” edited by Breymeyer and Van Dyne (1980), and in“Grassland Ecophysiology and Grazing Ecology” (Lemaire et al. , 2000).
I did not know whether to place microbial ecology under soil microbiology or
soil ecology. In concepts, methods, and application, microbial ecology has beencloser to soil microbiology than to classical ecology. Numerous authors havebemoaned the fact that there is not an extensive idea and concept exchange betweenmicrobial ecology and ecology in general. However, this is rapidly changing withthe recognition that the diverse and extensive soil and aquatic and sediment biotacan now be studied with molecular methods. The great diversity and close inter-actions of organisms with mineral particles makes soil an ideal place to developand test ecological concepts. According to Marshal (1993), microbial ecology hasthe goals of deﬁning population dynamics in microbial communities and the phys-iochemical characteristics of microenvironments and understanding the metabolic
processes carried out by microorganisms in nature. It recognizes as its foundersthe same scientists (Leeuwenhoek, Winogradsky, and Beijerinck) that developedsoil microbiological thought. Microbial ecology has the ability to transcend dif-ferent habitats, asking questions about soils, plants, animals, fresh waters, oceans,and sediments, as well as geological strata. It also has received great impetus fromthe recent advances in nucleic acid techniques and, thus, one of its more modernpioneering works has to be that of Watson and Crick, which eventually led to thenuclear-based techniques.
The ﬁrst textbook published with the title “Microbial Ecology” was that of Brock
(1966). Brock (1975), in “Milestones in Microbiology,” published the key papers ofPasteur, Koch, and others in a translated, annotated format. The publication of thetriennial meetings of the International Society of Microbial Ecology provides a use-ful chronology of advances in this ﬁeld. Some include Ellwood et al. (1980),
“Contemporary Microbial Ecology;” Klug and Reddy (1984), “Current Perspec-tives in Microbial Ecology;” and Guerrero and Pedros-Alio (1993), “Trends inMicrobial Ecology.” Other reviews include Lynch and Poole (1979) and the series“Advances in Microbial Ecology” published by Plenum Press. The training andbackground of microbial ecologists are often very different from those of classicalecologists, and until recently, there has not been enough cross-fertilization of ideasbetween the ﬁelds.
SOIL BIOCHEMISTRY
Soil biochemistry, as deﬁned in this book, refers to the characteristics and
dynamics of organic matter and the biochemical transformations brought about bySoil Biochemistry 13Ch01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 13
enzymes and organisms in soil. Biochemical reactions appear to have proceeded
without microorganisms. Later microorganisms were active without the presenceof plants and animals for long periods of the earth’s history. Biochemical reac-tions similar to those occurring in modern soils are thought to have occurred foran extended period before the occurrence of the ﬁrst bacteria identiﬁed in rocksthat have an age of approximately 3.8 billion years. Phototrophic bacteria andcyanobacteria have been identiﬁed in rocks that are 2.8 billion years old. Vascularplants and mammals are a product of only the past 500 million years.
Experiments with iron sulﬁdes, at the elevated temperatures and pressures found
in hydrothermal vents, have indicated the possibility of the formation of prebiotic,organic substrates. These are believed to involve organo-metal interactions oftenstudied in today’s soil biochemistry. Another theory involves an alkaline world inwhich the activity of negatively charged clay minerals, such as smectite, organizedfatty acid micelles and lipids into vesicles that contained active clays. These aresaid to have concentrated and polymerized RNA and DNA. Once formed, vesiclessuch as these are postulated to have grown by extrusion through small pores. Thesereactions are all familiar to the soil biochemist, as are the concepts involving micro-pores, enzymatic activity, and habitat formation so important in early life studies(Bada and Laszano, 2003).
Waksman (1938), in his book entitled “Humus,” states that from Theophrastus
(373–328 BCE) to the time of Wallerius (1709–1778 CE), the concept of oleumuntuosm, equating fertile soil with the fatness of the land, dominated the ideasof naturalists. The word “humus” was extensively used in Virgil’s (79–19 BCE)poetry about farming, food production, and the joys of country life. His poetry isextensively quoted relative to soil fertility, decomposition, gardening, nature, theenvironment, and organic agriculture, with the 39 BCE quote from the secondGeorgics
“pinquis humus dulcique uliine laeta; Quique frequens hebis et fertilis übre
campus”
being the most familiar. The word humus, together with terra and solum, was used
for earth. It is the root word for humans, homo, and even posthumous, after theearth or death. Virgil referred to dark soil as fertile, and the ancients knew thatdark-colored soil was more productive, absorbed more water, and was easier to tillthan its lighter colored counterparts in the landscape. They had also observed thatexposure to ﬂames often lightened the soil. Feller (1997) quotes Pliny the Elder(23–79 CE) as saying
“the lupin penetrates the humus and wheat needs two feet of humus.”
The period of alchemy and the phlogistic theory continued to use the original
Latin deﬁnition of humus as soils or earth, as did Linnaeus (1707–1778), the greatSwedish botanist. He classiﬁed soils as Humus daedalea (garden soil), Humus
rualis (ﬁeld soil), and Humus latum (muck soil). The concept that the application14 Chapter 1 S OILMICROBIOLOGY , ECOLOGY , ANDBIOCHEMISTRY IN PERSPECTIVECh01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 14
of dung to the soil replaced some substances that had been removed by plants was
established in the 16th century. Van Helmont’s (1577–1644) experiments that con-cluded that water w as the source of plant nutrition were repeated by Robert Boyle
with the same conclusion. However, Woodward in 1699 showed that impure water,such as that from the river Thames, increased the growth of mint. He also reported
that dung that returns parts of either vegetables or animals was the best way ofrestoring soil. Böerhavein, in a 1727 textbook of chemistry, wrote that plants absorbthe juices of the earth. Tull in 1730 stated that small, earth-like particles serve asnutrients for plants.
Wallerius in 1753 (see Feller, 1997) used the Latin word humus for loam or
mold, which at that time referred to the organic surface horizon relative to decom-posing organic matter, and is thus credited with the modern use of humus for organicmatter. This was made easier by the fact that the later Roman and Latin texts thenutilized the word terra rather than humus for earth. Wallerius went along with thethinking of that time in assuming humus was the essential nutritive element andthat other soil constituents acted in mixing or dissolving it and, thus, assisted uptakeby plants. Lime was considered to help dissolve the fat (humus) of the land andthe function of clay was to ﬁx or retain this fatness. The Russian scientist Komov,in his 1782 book on agriculture, associated the hydrophysical properties of soil andits richness in nutrients with the presence of humus and stated that the “nutritivejuice” of soil was produced by rotting.
De Saussure, known for his chemical studies, also spent considerable time on
humus. In 1804, he described humus as being of various complexes (oils and salts),capable of absorbing oxygen and producing CO
