### Section

472 Chapter 17 Management of Organisms and Their Processes in Soils
other human foodstuffs includes yeast ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae ) in bread mak-
ing and the cultivation of mushrooms.
Managing microorganisms can mean combating pathogenic or infectious
organisms or promoting beneﬁcial organisms or their products. Ancient Chineseand Arab cultures developed a procedure for scraping sores of people infectedwith mild cases of smallpox and infecting healthy people to ward off a more seriouscase of the disease. This practice was eventually introduced in Western Europe inthe 1800s when Edward Jenner inoculated people with cowpox germs as a preven-tion against smallpox (Wilson, 1976). Jenner termed the procedure vaccination, fromthe Latin word vacca , for cow. However, the rational basis for vaccination came
from Louis Pasteur’s experiments with chicken cholera. Pasteur could have usedthe phrase he coined, “Chance only favors the prepared mind,” to describe anothermanipulation of organisms that led to the discovery and production of penicillin.The accidental contamination of a culture plate of staphylococci by a mold(Penicillium notatum ) led to the discovery and naming of penicillin by Sir Alex ander
Fleming in 1928 (Wilson, 1976; Forester, 1998). This discovery led to the productionof penicillin as an antibacterial drug 12 years later by E. Chain and H. W. Florey. Thistouched off a worldwide search for soil organisms with antibiotic characteristics andthe discovery of streptomycin by Dr. Selman Waksman, a soil microbiologist.
Since agriculture has been practiced for thousands of years, it is no surprise that
examples of managing and manipulating microorganisms are abundant. Farming,especially in the uplands of Greece, intensiﬁed around 800 BCE, giving rise to ero-sion and decreased fertility (Encyclopedia Britannica, http://www. search. eb.com).As time went on, the Romans continued the practice of clearing forests and exces-sive grazing and cultivation of the land. However, the Romans recognized that tohelp fertility, the land needed to be fallowed at some time. They also were awarethat to boost fertility, they needed to rotate crops and add lime and manure (Hillel,1992). They found that growing alfalfa and clover added fertility, as did usinggreen manures such as lupines, but they did not know why. Parallel with agricul-ture development was the practice of composting, in which a soil pit was main-tained with human and animal waste, weeds, leaves, and household waste andwatered regularly. The decomposed material was used as fertilizer and mulch thatimproved the physical, chemical, and biological characteristics of the soil. Themanagement of microorganisms extends to plant pathology as well. For centuriesit was known that there was an association between barberry and stem rust ofgrain (Walker, 1950). In the 1600s, farmers sought to adopt a barberry-eradicationmeasure without knowing the cause-and-effect relationship. Likewise with simpleobservation and intuition, farmers began using salt brine to control wheat bunt.
These few examples depict a human population that has been managing microor-
ganism and their processes for thousands of years. Many of the agricultural, forestry,and rangeland practices we use today actually have deleterious effects uponmicroorganisms and their processes. Practices including plowing, clear-cuttingforests, and overgrazing of rangeland decrease organism populations and promotenutrient loss, with an overall result of decreasing soil quality. Humans as caretakersCh17-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  7:15 PM  Page 472
of the land must reverse land degradation to increase soil quality and ecosystem
health to provide food and ﬁber for a growing world population. We can begin thislong journey by developing ways in which to manage organisms and their beneﬁ-cial processes in soil systems.
CHANGING SOIL ORGANISM POPULATIONS
AND PROCESSES
Soil organic matter (SOM), a direct result of microbial activity, plays a role in
terrestrial ecosystem development and functioning. In both undisturbed and culti-vated systems, potential productivity is directly related to SOM concentrationsand turnover. The dominant effect that SOM has on ecosystem structure and sta-bility is clear evidence for the need to protect current organic matter levels and todevelop management practices that will enhance soils with declining SOM con-tents (see Chap. 12 for more detail on organic matter). Organic matter contents insoils range from less than 0.2% in desert soils to over 80% in peat soils. In tem-perate regions, SOM ranges between 0.4 and 10.0%, with soils of humid regionsaveraging 3–4% and those in semiarid areas 1–3%. Although it is only a smallfraction of the soil, components of SOM are the chief binding agents for soilaggregates that, in turn, control air and water relations for root growth and provideresistance to wind and water erosion. With 95% of soil nitrogen (N), 40% of soilphosphorus (P), and 90% of soil sulfur (S) being associated with the SOM frac-tion, decomposition and turnover can supply most macronutrients needed forplant growth (Smith and Elliott, 1990; Smith et al. , 1992). During decomposition,
microorganisms assimilate complex organic substrates for energy and carbon (C)and release inorganic nutrients. This process is controlled by temperature, mois-ture, soil disturbance, and the quality of SOM as a microbial substrate. These fac-tors, together with the size and activity of the microbial population, regulate therate of decomposition and nutrient release (Smith and Paul, 1990; Smith, 1994).
The two most signiﬁcant regional ecosystem disturbances that directly decrease
SOM are tropical and boreal deforestation and the intensive cropping of theworld’s prime farmland and forests. Forests and agricultural lands contain 90% ofterrestrial C and are responsible for 80% of the yearly primary C production(Smith and Paul, 1990). The decrease in SOM is paralleled by declines in soil pro-ductivity and contributes to increasing global CO
2concentrations. In both forest
and agricultural ecosystems, the management of plant residues is necessary toprevent SOM decline and possible ecosystem collapse.
Recent years have witnessed increased concern about environmental pollution
from synthetic chemicals and disposal of wastes. Problems with toxic waste dumps,garbage landﬁlls, and acid rainfall have focused attention on the soil, the mostwidely used depository. The soil as a depository is a perturbed system, experiencinggross changes in temperature, moisture, and biological activity. Controlling fac-tors and processes may be drastically altered under these circumstances, causingChanging Soil Organism Populations and Processes 473Ch17-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  7:15 PM  Page 473
chemical cycling, ecosystem stability, and system resiliency to shift in unpre-
dictable ways.
TILLAGE AND EROSION
Tillage affects the amount of SOM buildup or loss in two ways: (1) through the
physical disturbance and mixing of soil and the exposure of soil aggregates to dis-ruptive forces and (2) through incorporation and distribution of plant residues in thesoil proﬁle. The degree of residue incorporation has a major effect on microbialactivity and the rate of decomposition. Decomposition rates of residues are generally
slower when left on the soil surface than when buried in soil. The combination ofreduced litter decomposition rates and less soil disturbance usually results in greateramounts of SOM in reduced tillage vs conventionally tilled systems (Dalal et al. ,
1991). Tillage also alters the physical and chemical properties of the soil environ-ment by affecting water content and aeration, as well as the microclimate near thesoil surface. These in turn regulate the soil biota and the biological processes theymediate. Conventional cropping practices with intensive tillage simplify micro-bial community structure, resulting in lower stability or resiliency in function. Forexample, reductions in stability have led to gaps in biochemical functions relatedto N transformations during periods of environmental stress or when plants arenot present. Reduced tillage and cover crops generate soil-litter conditions verydifferent from those of conventional systems. The distributions and types of residuesmodify microbial biomass, pathogen, and nematode and insect community struc-ture and regulate microbial mineralization/immobilization rates controlling theloss of C and N from soil (Curci et al., 1997; Calderon et al., 2000).
Between 35 and 50% of the SOM and N were lost during the ﬁrst 50 years of
tillage in the Great Plains of the United States (Bauer and Black, 1981). This lossis most rapid during the ﬁrst few years of cultivation, and eventually an apparentequilibrium is established, provided constant management practices are employed.The time required to reach this equilibrium will vary depending on climatic con-ditions, extent of erosion, type and rate of residue return, and soil type.
Over a 14-year period in Canada, cultivated, brown, prairie soils lost 26% of
their SOM and 33% of their N. In the next 20 years, losses decreased by half(Doughty et al., 1954; Campbell et al., 1975). In other Canadian soils, over a 60-
to 80-year period, C and N losses ranged from 50 to 60% and 40 to 60%, respec-tively (Campbell et al., 1976; V oroney et al., 1981). There is substantially less infor-
mation concerning the effects of cultiv ation on chemical and ph ysical soil properties
in semiarid tropical regions. A 1986 study (Dalal and Mayer, 1986) found that soilsin southern Queensland, Australia, had lost 36% of their C and N over a 20- to 70-year period and that numerous fertility parameters related to SOM levels weredeclining. Losses of C and N from tillage are usually determined by comparingcultivated with native uncultivated systems, but other factors are also involved inthese losses. The effect of tillage in the long term is to decrease the SOM level,which, in turn, disrupts nutrient cycling and fertility and degrades soil quality.474 Chapter 17 Management of Organisms and Their Processes in SoilsCh17-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  7:15 PM  Page 474
The practice of no tillage was developed to counteract the destructive effects of
tillage. In two studies in the United States soil attributes from no-tillage ﬁeldswere compared to those of conventionally tilled ﬁelds (Doran, 1980) and Conser-vation Reserve Program (CRP) ﬁelds were compared to paired, conventionallytilled ﬁelds (Staben et al. , 1997). The no-tilled ﬁelds were in no-till between 5 and
10 years and the CRP ﬁelds had been returned to grass for 7 years. The results arepresented in Table 17.1 and are expressed as the ratio of the no-till data to the con-ventionally tilled or CRP data. Total soil C and N increased in the no-till soils butreturning cropland to grassland had little effect. Similarly, the microbial biomassincreased only in the no-till system compared to the conventional system. Return-ing ﬁelds to a less disturbed state signiﬁcantly increased the numbers of fungi andbacteria and the dehydrogenase enzyme activity (a measure of biological activ-ity). Nutrient cycling as measured as potentially mineralizable N increased by35% in the no-till system and only 13% in the converted grass system. These datafrom widely different geographical locations and soil types show the importanceand signiﬁcance of tillage for organism populations and function. More impor-tantly the CRP data suggest the effect on organisms is not simply due to increasesin soil organic C.
In a compilation of 106 studies (Wardle, 1995), scientists were able to develop
an index of the effects of tillage on detrital food webs and compare conventionaltillage to no tillage. In most of the studies, the soil total C and N concentrationswere less in the conventionally tilled soil compared to the no-tilled soil, as was thesoil microbial biomass. However, as in the previous studies cited abo ve, the increase
in the microbial biomass in the no-till soils seemed to be greater than would beexpected from an increase in SOM. This phenomenon is usually attributed to anincrease in SOM quality due to frequent additions of residues to the surface of theChanging Soil Organism Populations and Processes 475
TABLE 17.1 Ratios of Nutrients and Microbial
Populations in the 0- to 7.5-cm Soil Depth of No-Tillage,
Conventional Tillage, and Conservation Reserve Program Soils
Soil parameter NT:CTaCRP:CTb
Total carbon 1.25 0.99Total nitrogen 1.20 1.10Microbial biomass 1.14 1.04Fungi 1.57 1.59Aerobic bacteria 1.41 1.16Dehydrogenase 1.50 1.40
PMNc1.35 1.13
aRatio of no-tillage to conventional tillage values.
bRatio of Conservation Reserve Program to conventional
tillage values.
cPotentially mineralizable nitrogen.Ch17-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  7:15 PM  Page 475
soil compared to rapidly decomposed buried residue, which contains more recal-
citrant compounds.
In soil ecology, there is a good deal of interest in disturbance effects on trophic
levels but also on organism diversity within the trophic level. A limited subset ofstudies tended to show that species diversity of the microfaunal groups is unchangedby tillage, while the macrofaunal groups can be elevated or reduced in diversity bytillage. The changes in organism biodiversity and its variability due to tillage arelikely unpredictable because of the complexity and lack of understanding of theinteractions between trophic levels. Overall, this indicates that soil food webs arefairly stable and have a signiﬁcant amount of resiliency.
The microﬂora (bacteria and fungi) were generally mildly inhibited by tillage,
whereas the microfauna of nematodes and protozoa was mildly to moderatelyinhibited by tillage in 50% of the studies. The mesofauna group of collembolan andmites tended to be moderately inhibited and the macrofauna group of earthwormsand beetles was moderately to extremely inhibited by tillage. Thus, in general thelarger organisms were more likely to be reduced than the smaller organisms undertillage systems compared to no-till systems.
Compaction is widespread worldwide and particularly signiﬁcant where inten-
sive mechanization is applied to soils subject to high rainfall or irrigation. Soilcompaction has dramatic effects on plant growth, the soil biota, and biologicalprocesses. Compaction has been shown to affect speciﬁc microbial activities, e.g.,soil respiration and the denitriﬁcation potential through direct effects on soil watercontent and aeration. A study (Robertson et al., 2000) showed that greenhouse gas
emissions were eightfold higher in compacted conventionally tilled systems thanin no-till. There is also increasing evidence for the role of pore size in regulatingsoil microbial populations and their biochemical processes. The shift in the rela-tive abundance of pore sizes induced by soil compaction directly affects the abun-dance of microbial populations (Postma and van Veen, 1990). Compactionreduced the predation efﬁciency of protozoa or nematodes on bacteria due to adecrease in accessible pore space. The manipulation of habitable pore space dueto tillage disturbance and soil compaction may regulate the types of organismspresent and thus control the transformation of essential plant nutrients.
Tillage not only reduces SOM through disruption and oxidation, but also can
create signiﬁcant soil erosion over the landscape. The loss of soil through erosionis a signiﬁcant problem worldwide. In some areas with highly erodible land-scapes, such as areas of the United States, soil loss rates can exceed 38 T soil ha
/H110021
year/H110021. It is estimated that about 20% of the soil C dislocated by erosion will be
released into the atmosphere as CO 2, the rest being deposited over other land areas
and into streams and rivers. Since it is mainly surface soil that is lost during ero-sion events, there is an associated loss of SOM high in biological activity. Towardthe end of the 20th century, conservation tillage practices were increasingly imple-mented to reduce erosion and increase soil fertility. These practices have also beenshown to increase soil biological activity and the mass of soil organisms in thesurface soil.476 Chapter 17 Management of Organisms and Their Processes in SoilsCh17-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  7:15 PM  Page 476
Soil erosion and SOM loss are by-products of agricultural production and con-
tribute to C and N losses. There is also a parallel and signiﬁcant effect on soilorganism populations and activity. Biological activity and biodiversity are impor-tant in determining deleterious effects of management on soil physical and chem-ical properties and the resulting effects on the sustainability of agricultural land.More research is needed to identify the relationships between microbial commu-nity composition (biodiversity), soil processes, and soil fertility on the health ofthe soil and its ability to provide a medium for plant growth.
RANGELAND AND FOREST HEALTH
Much of the environmental movement of the 1970s and 1980s focused on
decreasing the degradation of the environment, be it developing better ﬁshingequipment to decrease damage to ocean bottoms and the trapping of nontarget ﬁshto educational campaigns concerning the destruction of the rainforests. In the1990s, the scientiﬁc community turned from monitoring degrading practices toevaluating a holistic attribute, ecosystem health. This direction began with workon soil quality, much like air and water quality assessments of the 1980s, andevolved into such work as rangeland health and forest ecosystem health. TheNational Research Council suggested that rangeland health be deﬁned as “thedegree to which the integrity of the soil and ecological processes of rangelandecosystems are sustained.” Healthy would be the dictionary deﬁnition of: (1) functioning properly or normally in its vital functions, (2) free from malfunc-tion of any kind, and (3) productive of good of any kind. These deﬁnitions alsoapply to forest ecosystems.
At the core of ecosystem health is soil quality, deﬁned as “the capacity of a soil to
function within ecosystem boundaries to sustain biological productivity, maintainenvironmental quality, and promote plant and animal health.” The major issues are:
1. productivity—the ability of soil to enhance plant and biological productivity;
2. environmental quality—the ability of soil to attenuate environmental con-
taminants, pathogens, and offsite damage;
3. animal health—the interrelationship between soil quality and plant, animal,
and human health.
Within the context of the soil quality concept, it is evident that soil biology,
speciﬁcally microorganisms and their processes, will play a major role in deter-mining the health of the ecosystem. Thus, in situ parameters or management that
enhance or degrade microbial habitat will shift the health of the system. Attributesthat affect the functioning of the soil system are listed in Table 17.2 and, whenmeasured in the context of the proper ecological question, can be used to evaluateecosystem health. The proper ecological question means “what is the function ofthe ecosystem?” or “what is the ecosystem going to be used for?” Thus, the soilquality attributes for an urban area may be different from the soil quality attributesfor range- and pasture land.Changing Soil Organism Populations and Processes 477Ch17-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  7:15 PM  Page 477
A major attribute of healthy soil is the level of SOM, which controls many of
the chemical and physical parameters of soil. For example, in Table 17.2 SOM caninﬂuence bulk density, water-holding capacity and retention, and soil temperatureand buffer the soil pH and electrical conductivity as well as inﬂuencing biologicalactivity. However, as we have seen SOM can be rapidly lost through oxidation andby wind and water erosion processes. Most of the 1965 million hectares (Mha) ofdegraded land worldwide suffers from low organic matter content. Thus, thesingle most overriding factor for increasing soil quality and ecosystem health isincreasing the level of SOM.
Coupling the ecosystem health concept with increasing SOM levels has
recently drawn attention due to global warming and greenhouse gas issues. Sincethe most abundant greenhouse gas is CO
2and CO 2is the raw material for SOM
after it is ﬁxed by plants, increasing SOM will remove CO 2from the atmosphere.
Signiﬁcant scientiﬁc activity has been aimed at estimating the potential for soilsto sequester more SOM and thus be a sink for atmospheric CO
