### 2 He showed that it contained

2. He showed that it contained
more C and less O and H than the plant residues that went into its formation. Healso established that plants synthesize their organic matter from CO
2and give off
O2. Thaer in 1808 differentiated between peat formed in limited O 2and mild
humus formed under adequate O 2. He ascribed to the humus theory of plant nutri-
tion, which stated that humus was the direct source of plant nutrients. Thaer alsohas been called the father of sustainable agriculture (see Feller et al. , 2003b). One
of his books stated,
“Latterly the practice of sowing white clover with the last crop has become
very general; only a few apathetic and indolent agriculturalists or men who areﬁrmly wedded to old opinions and customs, neglect this practice.”
It took the work of Sprengel in 1826, Liebeg in 1840, and Boussingault in 1841 (see
Feller et al. , 2003b) to found the concept of mineral nutrition of plants. However,
modern organic agriculture still credits soil organic matter with properties otherthan nutrient supply, water and nutrient retention, complexation, and aggregation.Humic constituents in small quantities continue to be investigated for their effecton plant respiration as does the use of speciﬁc plant- and microbial-derived mole-cules as information signals for plant and microbial interactions (Vaughn, 1985;Bais et al. , 2004).Soil Biochemistry 15Ch01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 15
Berzelius, ﬁrst in 1806 and later in the 1830s, described the dark, black, and
lighter yellow humic compounds and showed their interactions with metals. Fieldexperiments carefully conducted in 1834 by Boussingault, considered the father ofmodern scientiﬁc agronomy, analyzed the C, H, O, N, and mineral inputs in manurerelative to those in subsequent plant parts grown on manured soils. In 1826 and1837, Sprengel found that the C content of humus is 58%, described the most impor-tant characteristics of humates (its salts), and studied their decomposition and sol-
ubility characteristics. The Russian scientist German, in 1837, still believed thathumus was a direct source of plant nutrition, but found that cultivated soils containedless humus than virgin ones and attempted to obtain scientiﬁc conﬁrmation of thevalue of rotations. This was a prelude to modern-day sustainable agriculture andthe questions arising today regarding soil C and global change. He also was the ﬁrstto question whether humic acids were chemically individual compounds. The largenumber of fractions he, and later others, identiﬁed as constituents of humus was notfound to be reproducible and this led to a general questioning of the usefulness ofsoil organic matter fractionation. Danish scientist Müller (see Wilde, 1946) fur ther
deﬁned the solubility and characteristics of humics in his book “Natural Forms ofHumus” and developed the concepts of Mull and Mor in forest soils. Mull horizonshad earthworms and fungi, whereas earthworms were absent from Mor soils.
Dokuchaiev, the founder of Western soil science, recognized the involvement of
the ﬁve interacting factors of soil formation (parent material, vegetation, organisms,climate, and time) in the development of rich, high-organic-matter, chernozemicsoils. Other scientists in this productive period include Kostychev, who in 1886suggested that products synthesized by bacteria participated in the production ofhumic substances (see Kononova, 1961). Hebert in 1892 and Dehérain in 1902developed the concept of humus formation as the interaction of lignin and proteina-ceous substances. Büchner is credited for his pioneering work in enzymology by
disrupting yeast cells to produce a cell-free system capable of alcoholic fermentation.This later led to the many investigations of enzyme reactions in soils.
During the period of 1908–1930, Shreiner, Shorrey, and their co-workers used
large-scale extraction equipment to isolate 40 identiﬁable organics including hydro-carbons, sterols, fats, organic acids, aldehydes, carbohydrates, and organic P and N
compounds. These studies gained a great deal of attention because of their precision,but may have detracted from the overall study of soil organic matter as a naturalentity. They were a prelude to Waksman’s detailed studies on the proximate analy-sis of organic matter in which he rejected the concepts of humic and fulvic acids.
However, Tyurin in his 1937 book (see Kononova, 1961) on the organic matter ofsoils and Springer in 1934–1935 (see Kononova, 1961) regarded Waksman’sdenial of the existence of speciﬁc humic soil compounds as unfounded and incorrect,and claimed that proximate analysis, as suggested by Waksman, would not standthe test of time in that it characterized only a small fraction of humus. However,some mistrust of humic acid characterization, generated by Waksman’s criticisms,continues today in Western soil science, although humic acid chemistry is wellaccepted in aquatic research in both marine and freshwater environments.16 Chapter 1 S OILMICROBIOLOGY , ECOLOGY , ANDBIOCHEMISTRY IN PERSPECTIVECh01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 16
The translation of earlier Russian volumes entitled “Soil Organic Matter, Its
Nature, Its Role in Soil Formation and Soil Fertility” (Kononova, 1961) describedorganic matter much as it is deﬁned today and brought together literature on therole of physical, chemical, and biological factors of soil formation and its effecton cultivation. Stevenson’s 1994 book entitled “Humus Chemistry” recognized therole of humic and fulvic acids and humic fractionation and delineated today’sknowledge of organic C, N, P, and S transformations. Aiken et al. (1985) in “Humic
Substances in Soil, Sediment and Water” recognize the similarity of humic sub-stances in soils, sediments, and water. They describe methods, such as NMR andpyrolysis mass spectrometry, for studying this series of complex, and still difﬁcultto study, soil organic matter constituents that form such an important componentof present-day sustainable agriculture and global change investigations.
Nitrogen is important as a constituent of soil organic matter, as a nutrient in soil
fertility, in water pollution, and in trace-gas, radiative forcing in global change. Itthus continues to receive a great deal of attention. It took a great deal of researchand many publications to delineate the processes of N
2ﬁxation and N immobi-
lization, mineralization, plant uptake, and denitriﬁcation. The reviews edited byBartholomew and Clark (1965), Stevenson (1982), and Mosier et al. (2004) delineate
the use of instrumentation, tracers, and inhibitors in determining the processes andrates in soils. In 1943, Norman and Werkman labeled soybeans with 
15N. Addition of
the labeled residue to soil showed that 26% of the tagged N was recovered by a sub-sequent crop. Work with both 
15N and 13C by Broadbent and Norman in 1946, and
Broadbent and Bartholomew in 1948 (see Jansson, 1958; Paul and Van Veen, 1978),established the principles for the use of soil tracers. The equations of Kirkham and
Bartholomew (1955) for mineralization–immobilization and the epic work of Jannson
(1958) on soil N dynamics should be required reading for anyone today contem-
plating tracer studies.
The advent of tracers in the 1940s came at a time when the principles affecting
plant decomposition had been reasonably established. Harmsen and van Schreven(1955) summarized the early work on the effects of environmental factors and thepossibility of soil biota turnover in subsequent releases of N as follows:
“The study of the general course of mineralization of organic N was practically
completed before 1935. It is surprising that many of the modern publicationsstill consider it worthwhile to consider parenthetical observations dealing withthese entirely solved problems.”
These authors then pointed out that the relationships between C and N and the
effects of environmental factors had to be determined for each soil type, indicatingthat the underlying controls were not understood nor could the dynamics of resist-ant compounds be measured.
Libby developed the 
14C dating technique in 1952. It was used for peats, buried
soil proﬁles, and soil pedogenesis by Simonart and Mayaudon in 1958, Simonsonin 1959, and Tamm and Ostlund in 1960 (see Paul and Van Veen, 1978). In 1964,Soil Biochemistry 17Ch01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 17
Paul and co-workers carbon dated soil organic matter fractions to calculate their
mean residence times. The further interpretation of carbon dating by Scharpenseel,and Stout and Rafter (see Goh, 1991), did a great deal to establish pools and ﬂuxesfor modeling purposes. Decomposition experiments with plant residues withlaboratory-enhanced 
14C contents provided much information on the effects of
soil type and climate management in studies by Sorensen in 1967, Jenkinson andRayner in 1977, and Sauerbeck and Führ in 1968 (see Paul and Van Veen, 1978).Differences in naturally occurring 
13C resulting from C3 ↔C4 plant vegetation
switches and from enhanced CO 2experiments are now being effectively utilized
to answer global change and soil and ecological sustainability questions involvingsoil organic matter (Coleman and Fry, 1991; Boutton and Yamasaki, 1996).
The use of tracers allows one to also measure nontracer soil C and N. There is
continual turnover of organic matter during decomposition, and tracer experimentsoften show more soil C and N being released than can be determined in the absenceof the tracer. Some of today’s authors are mistakenly calling this priming. Fontaineet al. (2004) credit Löhnis as deﬁning priming in 1926 as an increased availability
of nutrients due to higher microbial acti vity resulting from the addition of substrate.
With the use of tracers, Broadbent and Bartholomew (1948) also deﬁned priming asthe increased mineralization of unlabeled soil organic matter constituents in the pres-
ence of available fertilizer N or labeled plant residues. Replacement by the tracerof nontracer C or N during normal soil dynamics must be taken into considerationbefore priming is said to occur. It is hoped that today’s authors will read the originalliterature and not erroneously redeﬁne what was established many years ago.Priming does occur. We must, however, use a mass balance approach together withthe tracers to determine that it is a net release of the nutrients from soil organic mat-ter and not a normal exchange of the tracer for nontracer isotopes during microbialgrowth and product formation.
There are excellent reviews on soil N, such as Bartholomew and Clark (1965),
Stevenson (1994), and Mosier et al. (2004). These contain discussions of the sig-
niﬁcance of ﬁxed ammonia as part of total soil N, especially with regard to depth,in clay soils. Today’s literature seems to have forgotten this constituent. It is hopedthat in the next 10 years, we will not read a spate of papers that claim to have newlydiscovered this not necessarily active, but important, N component.
Fred et al. (1932), Stewart (1975), and Graham (2000) have reviewed N
2ﬁxation.
Prosser (1986) and Norton (2000) reviewed nitriﬁcation, whereas N losses, especiallythose leading to pollution and global warming, have been covered in Robertson(2000) and Groffman (2000). Publications such as “Biogeochemistry” (Schlesinger,
1997) and “Geomicrobiology” (Ehrlich, 1996) cover related areas of nutrient cyclesand exchange in soils, freshwater sediments, and the vadose zone. The fact that theprocesses and process controls are similar in all environments is heartening for ourlevel of knowledge. These controls lead to a rather similar composition for organicmatter in most aerobic terrestrial soils. Modeling, such as that used by Jenkinson andRayner (1977), is now an integral part of soil biochemistry used to test concepts andextrapolate information to different landscapes and for future predictions. Whetherthe ability to develop reasonably descriptive models based primarily on soil organic18 Chapter 1 S OILMICROBIOLOGY , ECOLOGY , ANDBIOCHEMISTRY IN PERSPECTIVECh01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 18
matter dynamics, but not soil population data, can be attributed to the great redundancy
of microbial populations or to the fact that our models are not yet accurate enough torequire population input data is yet to be determined. The 10-volume, edited seriesentitled “Soil Biochemistry” initiated by McLaren and Peterson (1967) has since beencoedited by Paul and Ladd and by Stotsky and Bollag. It has brought together infor-mation on biologically related soil processes and components, nutrient cycles, andenzymes. It has also covered extraterrestrial life, soil enzymes, and pollutants as theyaffect soil organisms and the environment. The best way to summarize this section onsoil biochemistry is to republish the cartoon from the comic strip Peanuts that wasincluded in the ﬁrst volume of the “Soil Biochemistry” series (Fig. 1.2).
IN PERSPECTIVE
The soil microbiologist, ecologist, and biochemist must be aware that their
organisms and processes are affected by soil type, vegetation, landscapes, andmanagement. Forestry and rangelands are a very important component of ourIn Perspective 19
PEANUTS
YOU DON'T KNOW
IT, BUT YOUR 
TROUBLES ARE JUST 
BEGINNING!10-1
SCHULZ
FIGURE 1.2 A dog’s eye view of decomposition and soil organic matter formation. Copyright
1962; reprinted by permission of United Feature Syndicate, Inc.Ch01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 19
studies. Wilde (1946), in his very readable book “Forest Soils and Forest Growth,”
quotes the following from the Kalevala, the National Epic of the Finns, dated toapproximately 900 BCE, showing that early man recognized the interaction ofsoil type and vegetation.
Seeds upon the land he scatters,
Seeds in every swamp and meadow,Forest seeds upon the loose earth,On the ﬁrm soil he plants acorns,Spreads the spruce seeds on the mountains,And the pine seeds on the hill-tops,In the swamps he sows the birches,On the quaking marshes alders,And the basswood in the valleys,In the moist earth sows the willows,Mountain ash in virgin places,On the banks of streams the hawthorn,Junipers on knolls and highlands;Thus his work did Pellerwoinen. . . .20 Chapter 1 S OILMICROBIOLOGY , ECOLOGY , ANDBIOCHEMISTRY IN PERSPECTIVE
Investigative science
Methodology
Modeling Education
ManagementConceptsSoil organic matter 
form – function
dynamics
C – N cycling 
Soil fertility
Soil biota
Processes InteractionsBiodiversity 
Microbes – Fauna
Plant – microbe 
interactions
Ecosystem services 
Bioremediation 
Pollution control 
Soil healthS, P Metals 
Pedogenesis 
Soil tilth
Global change 
Residue 
decomposition 
Radiative gasesFood – Fiber 
Living space 
Agriculture 
Forest 
Grassland 
Urban
FIGURE 1.3 The interplay of soil biota, interactions, and processes in investigative science and
management.Ch01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 20
The great biodiversity of soil biota in both macro and micro forms, and the impor-
tant questions that need to be answered, indicate to me that many of the new con-
cepts in our ﬁeld will come via the study of the physiology and ecology of soilorganisms, as well the processes they mediate relative to soil nutrient transforma-tions and global biogeochemical cycles. This text, therefore, has chapters on the
physiology–biochemistry of organisms as well as on ecology in an attempt toenhance the understanding required to provide a foundation for the interdisciplinaryapproaches that will continue to provide exciting new concepts in our ﬁeld. It ishoped that the individual chapters will provide new breakthroughs, concepts, meth-ods, and ideas, as well as more individualized references. Figure 1.3 shows the inter-dependence of soil microbiology, ecology, and biochemistry, some of its ﬁelds ofstudy, and some of its applications.
The last chapter in this volume will provide an oversight of the individual
chapters and, it is hoped, provide insights into the future.
This edition is dedicated to that great soil microbiologist, F. E. Clark, whose
keen insight and clear writing were such a joy to read in many early publications,as well as in the ﬁrst two editions of “Soil Microbiology and Biochemistry.”
REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READING
Aiken, G. R., McKnight, D. M., Wershaw, R. L., and MacCarthy, P. (1985). “Humic Substances in Soil,
Sediment and Water.” Wiley, New York.
Alef, K., and Nanipieri, P. (1995). “Methods in Applied Soil Microbiology and Biochemistry.” Academic
Press, London.
Alexander, M. (1961, 1977). “Introduction to Soil Microbiology.” 2nd ed. Wiley, New York.Atlas, R. M. (1984). “Microbiology: Fundamentals and Application.” Macmillan, New York.Bada, J. L., and Lazcano, A. (2003). Prebiotic soup—revisiting the Miller experiment. Science 300,
745–746.
Bais, H. P., Park, S. W., and Weir, T. L., et al. (2004). How plants communicate using the underground
information superhighway. Trends Plant Sci. 9, 26–32.
Bardgett, R. (2005). “The Biology of Soil: A Community and Ecosystem Approach.” Oxford Univ.
Press, Oxford.
Bardgett, R., Usher, M., and Hopkins, D. W., eds. (2005). “Biological Diversity and Function in Soils.”
Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK.
Bartholomew, W. V ., and Clark, F. E. (1965). “Soil Nitrogen.” Am. Soc. Agronomy, Madison, WI.Boughton, T. W., and Yamasaki, S., eds. (1996). “Mass Spectrometry of Soils.” Dekker, New York.Breymeyer, A. I., and Van Dyne, G. M., eds. (1980). “Grassland, Systems Analysis and Man.” Cambridge
Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK.
Broadbent, F. E., and Bartholomew, W. V . (1948). The effect of quantity of plant material added to soil
on its rate of decomposition. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 13, 271–274.
Broadbent, F. E., and Norman (1946). Some factors affecting the availability of the organic nitrogen in
soil – a preliminary report. Soil Sci. Soc. Amer. Proc. 11, 264–267.
Brock, T. D. (1966). “Microbial Ecology.” Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.Brock, T. D. (1975). “Milestones in Microbiology.” Am. Soc. Microbiol., Washington, DC.Burges, A., and Raw, F. (1967). “Soil Biology.” Academic Press, New York.Coleman, D. C., Crossley, D. A., Jr., and Hendrix, P. F. (2004). “Fundamentals of Soil Ecology.”
Elsevier–Academic Press, New York.References and Suggested Reading 21Ch01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 21
Coleman, D. C., and Fry, B. (1991). “Carbon Isotope Techniques.” Academic Press, San Diego.
Ehrlich, H. L. (1996). “Geomicrobiology.” 3rd ed. Dekker, New York.Ellwood, D. C., Hedger, J. N., Latham, M. J., et al. (1980). “Contemporary Microbial Ecology.” Academic
Press, London.
Feller, C. (1997). The concept of soil humus in the past three centuries. In“History of Soil Science”
(D. H. Yaalon and S. Berkowicz, eds.), V ol. 29, pp. 15–46. Catena Verlag GmbH, Reiskirchen,Germany.
Feller, C. L, Brown, G. H., and Blanchart, E., et al. (2003a). Charles Darwin, earthworms and the nat-
ural sciences: various lessons from the past to future. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 99, 29–49.
Feller, C. L., Thuries, L. J.-M., and Manlay, R. J., et al. (2003b). The Principles of Rational Agriculture
by Albrecht Thaer (1752–1738). An approach to the sustainability of cropping systems at thebeginning of the 19th century. J. Plant Nutr. Soil Sci. 166, 687–698.
Filipjev, I. N., and Schuurmans-Stekhoven, J. H. (1941). “A Manual of Agricultural Helminthology.”
E.J.B, Tuta Saegide Pallas, Leiden.
Fontaine, S., Bardoux, G., Benest, D., Verdier, B., Mariotti, A., and Abbadie, L. (2004). Mechanisms
of the priming effect in a Savannah soil amended with cellulose. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 68, 125–131.
Fred, E. B., Baldwin, I. L., and McCoy, E. (1932). “Root Nodule Bacteria and Leguminous Plants.”
Univ. of Wisconsin Studies, Madison, WI.
Goh, K. M. (1991). Carbon dating. In“Carbon Isotope Techniques” (D. C. Coleman and A. Fry, eds.),
pp. 125–151. Academic Press, San Diego.
Graham, P. H. (2000). Dinitrogen ﬁxation. In“Handbook of Soil Science” (M. E. Sumner, ed.), 
pp. C-139–147. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Groffman, P. M. (2000). Nitrogen in the environment. In“Handbook of Soil Science” (M. E. Sumner,
ed.), pp. C-19–200. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Guerrero, R., and Pedrós-Alió, C. (1993). “Trends in Microbial Ecology.” Spanish Soc. Microbiol.,
Madrid.
Hagen, J. B. (1992). “An Entangled Bank: The Origins of Ecosystem Ecology.” Rutgers Univ. Press,
New Brunswick, NJ.
Harley, J. L. (1969). “Biology of Mycorrhiza.” Leonard Hill, London.Harmsen, G. W., and van Schreven, D. A. (1955). Mineralization of organic nitrogen in soil. Adv. Agron.
7, 299–398.
Hillel, D. (1991). “Out of the Earth, Civilization and the Life of the Soil.” Univ. California Press,
Berkeley.
Jansson, S. L. (1958). Tracer studies of nitrogen transformation in soil with special attention to miner-
alization—immobilization relationships. Kungl. Landbrukshögkopans Annaler 24, 101–361.
Jenkinson, D. H., and Rayner, J. H. (1977). The turnover of soil organic matter in some of the Rothamsted
experiments. Soil Sci. 123, 298–305.
Jenny, H. (1941). “Factors of Soil Formation.” McGraw–Hill, New York.Jordan, C. F. (1985). “Nutrient Cycles in Tropical Forests.” Wiley, New York.Killham, K. (1994). “Soil Ecology.” Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK.Kirkham, D., and Bartholomew, W. V . (1955). Equations for following nutrient transformations in soils
utilizing tracer data, II. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 19, 189–192.
Klug, M. J., and Reddy, C. A. (1984). “Current Perspectives in Microbial Ecology.” ASM, Washington,
DC.
Kononova, M. M. (1961). “Soil Organic Matter, Its Nature, Its Role in Soil Formation and Soil
Fertility.” Pergamon, Oxford.
Lavelle, P., and Spain, A. V . (2001). “Soil Ecology.” Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht.Lemaire, G., Hodgson, J., and Moraes, A., et al. (2000). “Grassland Ecophysiology and Grazing
Ecology.” CAB Int., Wallingford.
Lie, T. A., and Mulder, E. G. (1971). “Biological Nitrogen Fixation in Natural and Agricultural
Habitats.” Nijhoff, The Hague.
Lipman, J. G. (1911). “Bacteria in Relation to Country Life.” Macmillan Co., New York.Löhnis, F., and Fred, E. B. (1923). “Textbook of Agricultural Bacteriology.” McGraw–Hill, New York.22 Chapter 1 S OILMICROBIOLOGY , ECOLOGY , ANDBIOCHEMISTRY IN PERSPECTIVECh01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 22
Lynch, J. M. (1983). “Soil Biotechnology.” Blackwell Sci., Oxford.
Lynch, J. M., and Poole, N. J. (1979). “Microbial Ecology, a Conceptual Approach.” Wiley, New York.Major, K. (1969). Historical development of the ecosystem concept. In“The Ecosystem Concept on
Natural Resource Management” (G. M. Van Dyne, ed.). Academic Press, New York.
Marshall, K. C. (1993). Microbial ecology: whither goest thou. In“Trends in Microbial Ecology”
(R. Guerrero and C. Pedros-Alió, eds.), pp. 5–8. ISME Secretariat, Barcelona.
McClaren, A. D., and Peterson, G. H. (1967). “Soil Biochemistry.” Dekker, New York.Metting et al. eds. (1992). “Soil Microbial Ecology: Applications in Agricultural and Environmental
Management.” Dekker, New York.
Morris, C. E., Bardin, M., Berge, O., et al. (2002). Microbial biodiversity: approaches to experimental
design and hypothesis testing in primary literature from 1975 to 1990. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 66,
592–616.
Morris, S. J., and Paul, E. A. (2003). Forest soil ecology and soil organic matter. In“The Potential for
U.S. Soils to Sequester Carbon” (J. M. Kimble, L. S. Heath, R. A. Birdsey, et al., eds.), pp. 109–126.
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Mosier, A. R., Syers, J. K., and Freney, J. R., eds. (2004). “Agriculture and the Nitrogen Cycle:
Assessing the Impacts of Fertilizer Use on Food Production and the Environment.” SCOPE Series65. Island Press, Washington, DC.
Norton, J. M. (2000). Nitriﬁcation. In“Handbook of Soil Science” (M. E. Sumner, ed.), pp. 139–147.
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Odum, E. P. (1971). “Fundamentals of Ecology.” 3rd ed. Saunders, Philadelphia.Paul, E. A., and Clark, F. E. (1989, 1996). “Soil Microbiology and Biochemistry.” Academic Press,
San Diego.
Paul, E. A., and Van Veen, J. A. (1978). The use of tracers to establish the dynamic nature of organic
matter. In11th International Congress of Soil Science, Edmonton, AB.
Pregitzer, K. S. (2003). Carbon cycling in forest ecosystems with an emphasis on below ground processes.
In“The Potential for U.S. Soils to Sequester Carbon” (J. M. Kimble, L. S. Heath, R. A. Birdsey, et al.,
eds.), pp. 93–108. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Prosser, J. I. (1986). “Nitriﬁcation.” IRL Press, Oxford.Robertson, G. P. (2000). Denitriﬁcation. In“Handbook of Soil Science” (M. E. Sumner, ed.),
pp. 181–189. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Sasser, J. N., and Jenkins, W. R. (1960). “Nematology: Fundamentals and Recent Advances.” Univ. of
North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.
Schlesinger, W. H. (1997). “Biogeochemistry: An Analysis of Global Change.” Academic Press, 
San Diego.
Smith, R. L., and Smith, T. H. (2001). “Ecology and Field Biology.” 6th ed. Benjamin–Cummings, 
San Francisco.
Stevenson, F. J. (1982). “Nitrogen in Agricultural Soils.” Agronomy Series 22. Am. Soc. Agronomy,
Madison, WI.
Stevenson, F. J. (1994). “Humus Chemistry.” 2nd ed. Wiley, New York.Stewart, W. D. P. (1975). “Nitrogen Fixation by Free Living Microorganisms.” Cambridge Univ. Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Stout, J. D, Bamforth, S. S., and Lousier, J. D. (1982). Protozoa. In“Methods of Soil Analysis.” Part 2.
Agron. Monogr. 9, 1103–1130. Am. Soc. Agronomy–SSSA, Madison, WI.
Subba Rao, N. S. (1999). “Soil Microorganisms and Plant Growth.” Science Pub., Enﬁeld, NH.Sylvia, D. M., Fuhrmann, J. H., Hartel, P. G., and Zuberer, D. A. (2005). “Principles and Approaches
of Soil Microbiology.” Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Van Elsas, J. D., Trevors, J. T., and Wellington, E. M. (1997). “Modern Soil Microbiology.” Dekker,
New York
Vaughan, D., ed. (1985). “Soil Organic Matter and Biological Activity.” Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht.Waksman, S. A. (1932). “Principles of Soil Microbiology.” Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore.Waksman, S. A. (1938). “Humus: Origin, Chemical Composition and Importance in Nature.” 2nd ed.
Williams & Wilkins, BaltimoreReferences and Suggested Reading 23Ch01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 23
Waksman, S. A. (1952). “Soil Microbiology.” Wiley, New York.
Waksman, S. A., and Starkey, R. L. (1931). “The Soil and the Microbe.” Wiley, New York.Wall, D., ed. (2004). “Sustaining Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services in Soils and Sediments.” Island
Press, Washington, DC.
Wild, A. (1988). “Russell’s Soil Conditions and Plant Growth.” 11th ed. Longman Sci. Tech., Essex.Wilde, S. A. (1946). “Forest Soils and Forest Growth.” Chronica Botanica, Waltham, MA.Winogradsky, S. N. (1949). “Microbiologie du Sol: Problems et Methodes.” Masson, Paris.24 Chapter 1 S OILMICROBIOLOGY , ECOLOGY , ANDBIOCHEMISTRY IN PERSPECTIVECh01-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  5:21 PM  Page 24
2
The Soil Habitat
R. P. Voroney
Introduction
Soil Genesis and Formation of the Soil HabitatPhysical Aspects of SoilSoil Habitat Scale and ObservationReferences and Suggested Reading
At ﬁrst sight nothing seems more obvious than that everything has a beginning and an end
and that everything can be subdivided into smaller parts. Nevertheless, for entirely specu-lative reasons the philosophers of Antiquity, especially the Stoics, concluded this conceptto be quite unnecessary. The prodigious development of physics has now reached the sameconclusion as those philosophers, Empedocles and Democritus in particular, who livedaround 500 BCE and for whom even ancient man had a lively admiration. (Svante Arrhenius,Nobel Lecture, 1903)
INTRODUCTION
Soil is the naturally occurring, unconsolidated mineral and organic material at the
earth’s surface that provides an environment for living organisms. Recently, it hasbeen referred to as the earth’s “critical zone” and as deserving special status,because of its role in controlling the earth’s environment and thus affecting thesustainability of life on the planet. This concept, that the earth’s physicochemicalproperties are tightly coupled to the activity of the living organisms it supports,was proposed in the early 1970s by James Lovelock as the Gaia hypothesis. Hetheorized that the Earth behaved as a superorganism, with an intrinsic ability tocontrol its own climate and chemistry and thus maintain an environment favorablefor life. However, it is only microorganisms that have proven they can sustain thebiosphere and can do so even without larger organisms.
25Ch02-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  6:37 PM  Page 25
26 Chapter 2 The Soil Habitat
The soil is where living organisms, or the biosphere, interact with rocks and
minerals (geosphere), water (hydrosphere), atmosphere, and dead organic matter(detritosphere). Scientists study soil because of the fundamental need to under-stand the dynamics of geochemical–biochemical–biophysical interactions at theearth’s surface, especially in light of recent and ongoing changes in global cli-mate. What complicates this study is that while geochemical ﬂuxes between thehydrosphere, atmosphere, and geosphere may take place over the time span ofhundreds to millions of years, biologically induced ﬂuxes between the geosphere,atmosphere, biosphere, and detritosphere take place over a much shorter time frame,hours and days to months.
The soil habitat is deﬁned as the totality of living organisms inhabiting soil,
including plants, animals, and microorganisms, and their abiotic environment.The exact nature of the habitat in which the community of organisms is living isdetermined by a complex interplay of geology, climate, and plant vegetation. Thisinteraction of rock and parent material with temperature, rainfall, elevation, latitude,exposure to sun and wind, and many more factors, over broad geographical regionswith similar environmental conditions and characteristic plant communities, hasevolved into the current terrestrial biomes with their associated soils (Fig. 2.1).
Because soils provide such a tremendous range of habitats, they support an
enormous biomass, with an estimated 2.6 /H1100310
29prokaryotic cells alone, and har-
bor much of the earth’s genetic diversity—a single gram of soil contains kilome-ters of fungal hyphae and more than 10
9bacterial cells, organisms belonging to
tens of thousands of different species. Micro-zones of good aeration may be onlymillimeters from areas poorly aerated. Areas near the soil surface may be enrichedwith decaying organic matter and other nutrients, whereas the subsoil may benutrient poor; the soil solution in some pores may be highly acidic, others morebasic, depending on soil mineralogy and biological activity. Temperature andwater contents of surface soil can vary widely from that of subsoils; and themicroenvironment of the surfaces of soil particles, where nutrients are concen-trated and water ﬁlms vary in thickness, is very different from that of soil pores.
SOIL GENESIS AND FORMATION OF
THE SOIL HABITAT
By deﬁnition, soils are greater than 10 cm thick if formed from minerals and
extend from the earth’s surface into the underlying parent material from whichthey are formed. Soil may even be covered with water to a depth of up to 0.5 m asin coastal tidal marshes or inland water areas where bodies of periodically sub-merged soils merge into bodies of water in the natural landscape.
When plant residues are submerged in water for prolonged periods of the year
and availability of O
2is limited, biological decay is slowed and organic matter in
various stages of decomposition accumulates. Deposits containing /H1102230% organic
matter and extending to depths of /H110110.5 m or more form organic soils, and they
include peatland, muck or bog, and fen soils.Ch02-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  6:37 PM  Page 26
150–200Precipitation
500–700
Evaporationt°CSoil
OrdersGeneral Comments
on ProcessesInceptisol Spodosol, Alfisol, Mollisol AridisolKaolinite Fresh rock
Little chemical alteration
Illite-montmorilloniteAl2O3
Fe2O3 + Al2O3Ultisol, OxisolPrecipitation (mm)
Temperature (˚C)3000
2700
2400
2100
1800
1500
1200
900
600
300
025
20
15
10
5
0Fall of vegetationSavannas Savannas Semidesert and desert Steppes Taiga zone Tundra Polar desert Tropic forest zone
Moisture and temperature
both diminish to the north;hence, weathering is slow,organic matter decompositionis slow, and either the slightprecipitation (polar desert) orpermafrost (tundra) inhibitleaching of mobileconstituentsHigh moisture promotes high
leaching; relatively low tem-perature results in relativelylow rate of organic matterdecompositionHigh temperature aids chemical
weathering, but low moistureinhibits vegetation, organic-matter buildup, and leaching ofmobile constituents.High moisture and
temperature result inrapid weathering and highrate of leaching of mobileconstituents
FIGURE 2.1 Environmental factors affecting the distribution of terrestrial biomes and formation of soils along a transect from
the equator to the north polar region (with permission from Birkeland, 1999).Ch02-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  6:37 PM  Page 27
