### Section pp577

This is generally low enough that using ﬁrst-order kinetics would not introduce
signiﬁcant errors. The size of the microbial population remains implicit in the ﬁrst-order kinetic constant k/H11032(as X
0in the µmaxX0/Ksterm). A fundamental assumption
of process-oriented models is that microbial processes are never limited by thesize of the microbial population. In other words, there is always sufﬁcient micro-bial diversity, and populations grow rapidly enough, to adapt to environmentalstresses and changes in substrate supply. These assumptions are generally validfor ecosystem-level models of organic matter dynamics and decomposition; how-ever, caution should be used when modeling speciﬁc processes performed byspeciﬁc organisms, such as nitriﬁcation.
Most models of soil organic matter dynamics begin by modeling the decay of
litter at the soil surface. The models assume that plant material contains a readilydecomposable fraction (typically water-extractable material—sugars, soluble phe-nols, and amino acids) and a more resistant fraction containing cellulose and
lignin (see Chap. 12 for additional information on C inputs to soil). Experimentshave shown that the initial plant litter N, polyphenol, carbohydrate, and lignincontents control litter decay rates along with the abiotic temperature and moistureenvironment (higher decay rates with higher soil temperature and moisture condi-tions). Decomposition of different plant material for long periods (2 to 5 years)under various climatic conditions shows that 5–25% of the original C remains.The remaining material consists of plant lignins, microbial products, and humicmaterial. The lignin:N ratio of plant material is positively correlated to the frac-tion of plant material resistant to decomposition. Most litter decay models includemicrobes that decompose plant material and form microbial products with a slowdecay rate. Many of the models also assume that the majority of plant lignin(/H1102270%) is directly transformed into organic material with a decay rate similar to
that of microbial products. Native SOM located below ground is generally des cribed
using multiple pools to acknowledge its chemical heterogeneity. The number ofpools included in each model varies signiﬁcantly (Table 16.3). The division ofSOM into various pools is based on stabilization mechanisms, bioavailability, andbiochemical and kinetic parameters. Generally, the pools consist of at least onesmall “active” pool with a rapid turnover rate and one or more larger pools with slowerturnover rates ranging from a few decades to thousands of years. The active poolsare more closely associated with measurable entities such as microbial biomass,while the longer lived pools are generally more conceptual.
A detailed description of each model is beyond the scope of this chapter; however,
we present the Rothamsted, Van Veen and Paul, and Century models as examples,with the focus on how they are constructed and on differences among them.
Rothamsted Model
The Rothamsted model (ROTH) was developed using the long-term wheat plots in
Rothamsted, England, and has more recently been used to simulate SOM dynam-ics at regional and global scales (Jenkinson and Rayner, 1977; Jenkinson et al. ,
1992). The model represents ﬁve SOM fractions: (1) resistant plant material448 Chapter 16 The Dynamics of Soil Organic MatterCh16-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  7:13 PM  Page 448
(k/H110050.03 year/H110021), (2) decomposable plant material ( k/H110054 year/H110021), (3) microbial
biomass ( k/H110050.41 year/H110021), (4) chemically stabilized SOM ( k/H110050.0003 year/H110021),
and (5) physically stabilized SOM ( k/H110050.014). The large number of data sets used
to parameterize the model included incubations with 14C-labeled plant material
(1- to 10-year periods), 1950–1990 thermonuclear radiocarbon generated by atmos-pheric bomb testing, microbial biomass estimates generated from chloroform fumi-gations, radiocarbon dating of SOM fractions, and measured long-term soil Clevels at the Rothamsted plots. The decomposition rate of each of these compo-nents was assumed to be ﬁrst order. It was also assumed that during decomposi-tion each of the ﬁve components decayed to CO
2, microbial biomass, and humiﬁed
organic matter in similar proportions (Fig. 16.4). The ﬁt between the model andthe experimentally determined results suggested that the model was a useful rep-resentation of the turnover of SOM in cropped soils. The model has since beentested using a variety of SOM data sets from cropping systems, including data setsfrom Rothamsted, England; western Canadian wheat–fallow systems; and sugar-cane soils in Brazil.
The initial version of the Rothamsted model used measured C inputs to drive
the model. However, later versions simulate plant production and nutrient cycling.More recently, Jenkinson (1990) added the impact of cation-exchange capacity onSOM stabilization. This alters the partitioning between CO
2and biomass plus
humus. Cation exchange capacity was preferred over clay content because it alsoaccounts for changes in clay mineralogy. The new version of the model alsoreplaced the small highly resistant pool ( k/H110050.00035 year
/H110021) with an inert pool to
account for the very old measured radiocarbon ages of SOM. Results from boththe ROTH and the Century models suggest there is a considerable amount of uncer-tainty about the processes that control the formation of passive or inert SOM.Recent experimental results from Australia would suggest that charcoal from theburning of grass and trees is an important source of inert SOM. However, the neces-sity for an inert pool versus a very recalcitrant pool is still under debate.Modeling the Dynamics of Decomposition 449
Organic
inputsDPM
RPM BIO
BIO HUM
HUM IOMdecayCO2
CO2
FIGURE 16.4 The ROTHC model showing the ﬂow of carbon through the turnover model
(with permission from Jenkinson, 1990). DPM, decomposable plant material; RPM, resistant plantmaterial; IOM, inert organic matter; BIO, microbial biomass; HUM, humiﬁed organic matter.Ch16-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  7:13 PM  Page 449
Van Veen and Paul Model
Van Veen and Paul (1981; Van Veen et al., 1984) developed a SOM model (Fig. 16.5)
in which plant litter is divided into three fractions: (1) easily decomposable sugarsand amino acids, (2) slowly decomposable cellulose and hemicellulose, and (3)resistant lignin. The soil C pools include: (1) microbial biomass, (2) decomposableSOM, and (3) recalcitrant SOM. The model assumes that microbes decompose theSOM and litter pools and that a certain fraction of the material decomposed willbe stabilized into microbial biomass. Once dead, the microbial biomass can be con-sidered as an easily decomposable pool (cytoplasm) and a more resistant compo-nent (cell wall). Table 16.4 shows the decomposition rate constant of the m icrobial
biomass and the size of the microbial product pools. The size of the mic robial prod-
uct pools is small, as these values describe only the products formed from therecently added residue, as would be found in a 
14C-labeling experiment. Having the
model separately follow tracers such as 14C and 15N can yield a great deal of infor-
mation about recently added components and results in rigorous testing of the model.
The model includes the impact of soil texture on soil C stabilization (higher stabi-
lization with higher silt and clay content), direct transfer of lignin-like plant mate-rial to the decomposable SOM pool, and the concept that both decomposable andrecalcitrant SOM is divided into physically protected and nonprotected fractions.The physically protected SOM fraction has a lower decomposition rate as a resultof soil physical aggregation (harder for microbes to decompose plant material in450 Chapter 16 The Dynamics of Soil Organic Matter
Aboveground
decomposition
Litter
RootsBeneath ground
BiomassNot physically
protected
Physically
protectedCO2CO2CO2CO2Decomposable
fractionLigniferous
fractionNon-lignin
fractionLigniferous
fraction
Recalcitrant native
soil organic matterDecomposable native
soil organic matter
Not physically
protected
Physically
protected50%
50%
80% 20% 33% 67%
FIGURE 16.5 The structure of the Van Veen and Paul model for soil organic matter dynamics
(with permission from Van Veen and Paul, 1981).Ch16-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  7:13 PM  Page 450
the middle of the soil aggregate). The model also assumes that cultivation of the
soil will increase the fraction of decomposable and recalcitrant pools in the non-physically protected fraction (soil aggregate disruption). Clay type, such as allo-phane, and the soil silt and clay content control stabilization of SOM. The size ofthe microbial biomass is largely controlled by the total soil C content, recent sub-strate additions, and clay content.
The Century Model
The Century model (Fig. 16.6), originally developed to model SOM dynamics
in the High Plains of the United States (Parton et al. , 1987, 1994), divides fresh
organic residues on the basis of the lignin to N ratio. Structural componentscomprising lignin, cellulose, and hemicellulose have a decomposition rate of 0.011 day
/H110021, metabolic components have a kof 0.03 day/H110021. Lignin content is also
used to control the decay rates of the structural components where high ligninresults in slower decay rates because lignin is closely associated with the celluloseand hemicellulose components and has a protective effect on them. Surface litter isshown to enter a surface microbial pool. Buried litter and roots feed into an active Cpool, which comprises microbial biomass and microbial metabolites. The slow Cpool ( k/H110050.00054 day
/H110021) has an intermediate turnover rate and receives some
C directly from the lignin plant components. The arrows showing the CO 2evolved
during each transformation are indicative of the microbial growth efﬁciencies dis-cussed earlier. The ﬁrst-order decay rates for each of the pools, given in Fig. 16.6,correspond to turnover times of roughly 3 and 0.5 years for the structural andmetabolic components, 1.5 years for the active fraction, 25 years for the slow, and1000 years for the passive pools. The Century model can utilize either monthly ordaily precipitation and air temperature data and soil-speciﬁc values such as sand,silt, and clay contents; bulk density; soil depth; and total soil C and N contents.Modeling the Dynamics of Decomposition 451
TABLE 16.4 Pool Sizes, Decomposition Rates, and Efﬁciency of Microbial Production Used in
the Van Veen and Paul Carbon Turnover Model Describing the Decomposition of 1000 µgg/H110021of Soila
Residue carbon Decomposition Utilization 
Pool ( µgg/H110021of soil) rate, k(day/H110021) efﬁciency (%)
Sugars, amino acids 150 0.2 60
Cellulose, hemicellulose 650 0.08 40Lignin 200 0.01 10Decomposable microbial products
b6 0.8 40
Recalcitrant microbial productsb4 0.3 25
Active protected soil organic matter 5000 3 /H1100310/H11002420
Old soil organic matter 7000 8 /H1100310/H11002720
aWith permission from V oroney et al. (1981).
bPool sizes shown refer to those produced from the added substrate alone. Actual total values in
soil are much larger.Ch16-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  7:13 PM  Page 451
Structural C
lignincellulose,
hemi-celluloseSURFACE LITTER BURIED LITTER
lignincellulose,
hemi-celluloseStructural C
Metabolic C
proteins, lipids,
starches,nucleic acidsMetabolic C
proteins, lipids,
starches,nucleic acids
Surface
Microbe Ccytoplasm,cell wallsActive C
microbes,metabolites
Slow Soil C
Passive Soil Cmicrobial walls,
metabolic,aggregate – clay
humics
clay-protected
Soluble Cleached,sub-surfaceCO
2
CO2CO2
CO2CO2
CO2L/N L/N
0.550.550.55 0.55 0.45(0.01)
0.3
(0.00054)
(0.000019)0.55(0.05)
(0.02)(0.013) (0.032)
0.3
FIGURE 16.6 The Century model showing lignin and N controls on the proportion of plant residue structural and metabolic
components. Carbon ﬂows entering microbial biomass and three soil components are controlled by decomposition rates (day/H110021)
shown in brackets. Microbial utilization efﬁciencies are shown on CO 2loss arrows (with permission from Parton et al., 1994).Ch16-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  7:13 PM  Page 452
The silt and clay contents play major roles in protecting the slow C pool, while
clay content controls formation of passive soil C.
ALTERNATIVE SOM MODELS
With a few exceptions, the pools used in the SOM dynamics models described
above are functional and kinetically deﬁned. While the microbial biomass and thelitter inputs are relatively easy to measure, it is difﬁcult to deﬁne a “slow” pool oforganic matter in chemical or physical terms. While the multicompartmentalmodels generally work well at predicting measured changes in total SOM, it isdifﬁcult to initialize models using independent measures and therefore they relyon site-speciﬁc calibrations based on total organic matter levels. Recent attemptshave been made to link conceptual pools of SOM with measurable fractions, lead-ing Elliott et al. (1996) to use the phrase “modeling the measurable or measuring
the modelable.” Such attempts include developing chemical or physical fraction-ation procedures to match measurable fractions to model pools (e.g., Sohi et al.,
2001) or to construct new models that coincide with measurable fractions. Manyof the model structures being proposed attempt to account for the various protec-tion mechanisms that stabilize incoming organic matter. One such example isillustrated in Fig. 16.7. However, the development of models based on physicalfractions is still in its infancy and has yet to overcome some of its challenges.Smith et al. (2002) have suggested that a measurable fraction and model pool are
equivalent only when the measured fraction is unique and noncomposite. To date,few models that have been developed and tested would meet these criteria.
It is recognized that SOM is a mixture of a very large number of organic com-
pounds with widely differing chemical and physical properties. The modelsdescribed above partition SOM into only a few discrete pools. Each pool is treatedas having constant characteristics, thus the changing dynamics of the whole organic
matter follows from the changing distribution among the various pools. This leadsto straightforward models, but their theoretical underpinning can be questioned.An alternative approach is to describe SOM as a continuum from fresh plant re sidues
to refractory humic substances. Bosatta and Ågren proposed that the heterogene-ity of SOM could be described using a quality variable ( q), which determines the
decomposition rate (Ågren and Bosatta, 1998; Bosatta and Ågren, 1985, 1995). Intheir model, qfor each cohort of new organic matter varies over time according
to a continuous-quality equation. The equation describes changes in the molecu-lar accessibility of a C atom to decomposers as the microbial population assim-ilates organic compounds and utilizes them to produce compounds of differentquality. While the QSOIL model is conceptually satisfying, its complex mathe-matics has limited its broad application. Yang and Janssen (2000) propose usinga single-pool, ﬁrst-order model that allows the rate constant ( k) to change. This
approach is attractive because it is derived only from measured quantities ofremaining organic material and there is no need for other variables that cannot bemeasured. The key feature of the model is that it takes into account the decreaseModeling the Dynamics of Decomposition 453Ch16-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  7:13 PM  Page 453
over time of the average and actual mineralization rates, which the authors refer to
as “aging.”
MODELS OF NON-C NUTRIENT ELEMENTS
Nutrient cycles in soil are tightly coupled through the nutrient demands of the
microbial biomass during decomposition. For this reason, several of the C-centricmulticompartmental models of SOM dynamics are able to model nutrient ele-ments such as N, P, and S (Table 16.3). Models that describe the dynamics of454 Chapter 16 The Dynamics of Soil Organic Matter
Unprotected
SOM
Physically
protected
SOM
Chemically
protected
SOM
Biochemically
protected SOMCO2CO2CO2
CO2/H11022250 µm
POM C
53–250 µm
POM C
Silt- and clay-
associated
C
Non-hydrolyzable
CAdsorption/
desorptionAggregate formation/
turnover
Condensation/
complexation
FIGURE 16.7 A soil organic matter dynamics model based on measurable fractions that
account for various protection mechanisms (with permission from Six et al., 2002).Ch16-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  7:13 PM  Page 454
nutrient elements differ in scale and scope from the models of SOM dynamics.
While SOM models evolved out of ecological and environmental perspectives,models of nutrient dynamics evolved primarily from the desire to improve agro-nomic crop production and fertilizer use efﬁciency. More recently, nutrient mod-els have been extended to the study of environmental pollution from excessfertilizer or the land spreading of manures and wastes.
Frissel and Van Veen (1982) classiﬁed models of soil N in terms of (1) their pur-
pose, prediction, management, or scientiﬁc understanding; (2) their time span; (3) whether they were budget-based or dynamic models; and (4) whether the modelswere dominated by transport processes, SOM dynamics, or soil–plant relations.Models of soil N dynamics generally include descriptions of physical processes suchas the transport of water, solutes, heat, and gases; biological processes such as min-eralization, immobilization, nitriﬁcation, and denitriﬁcation; and physicochemicalprocesses such as volatilization, adsorption, and ﬁxation. Model structures of soilN models, for example ANIMO illustrated in Fig. 16.8, generally resemble theconceptual depiction of the soil N cycle. A large set of models of N turnover in thesoil–plant system, both stand-alone models and submodels, have been comparedby running simulations on the same data set (de Willigen, 1991), similar to thecomparison of SOM models performed by Smith et al. (1997). The conclusions of
the N model comparison were that the models adequately predicted abovegroundprocesses such as plant uptake of N and dry matter production, but the simulationof belowground microbial N transformations was the most problematic. Wu andModeling the Dynamics of Decomposition 455
N2O, N2
NitrificationDenitrification
Fertilizer
NO3/H11002
Atmosphere
deposition
N in soil
organic matterMineralization
MineralizationImmobilizationOrganic N in plant
litter and manure
Decay
Dissolution
DissolutionAdsorptionDesorptionVolatilizationPlant uptake
NH3 NH4/H11001
N in soluble
organic matterNH4/H11001 at soil
complexLeaching Harvest output
FIGURE 16.8 The structure of the ANIMO N submodel for soil nitrogen dynamics (with per-
mission from Wu and McGechan, 1998).Ch16-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  7:13 PM  Page 455
McGechan (1998) provide a more detailed examination of four N dynamics mod-
els (SOILN, ANIMO, DAISY , and SUNDIAL), in which they focused on theequations representing the constituent processes. SOILN was found to have themost detailed treatment of plant uptake. ANIMO had the most complex treatmentof animal slurry and also the most mechanistic representation of denitriﬁcation. Inboth comparisons, the models demonstrated individual strengths and weaknesses,but in general they are more similar than they are different.
Phosphorus cycling models have been developed and incorporated into plant–
soil ecosystem models. Similar to N, the demand for P cycling models arosebecause soil P availability is the major nutrient limiting plant production in manytropical systems and, conversely, because P from nonpoint sources such as agri-cultural soils has a major environmental impact on water quality. Despite this, fewmodels calculating long-term changes in soil P have been developed partly becauseof the many complicated solid-phase interactions of P sorption to minerals overand above the biological transformations. Jones et al. (1984) originally developed
routines for simulating soil P dynamics, which became incorporated into the EPIC(erosion–productivity impact calculator) model. These routines have since beenincorporated into several other models that describe the transport of soluble andparticulate P, adsorption and desorption, mineralization and immobilization between
organic and inorganic forms, leaching, plant uptake, and runoff. As an example,the model structure of the GLEAMS P model is illustrated in Fig. 16.9. Lewis andMcGechan (2002) compared four of the published P cycling models (ANIMO,GLEAMS, DAYCENT, and MACRO) and concluded that all the existing modelshave substantial limitations and that a hybrid submodel combining the best fea-tures of these models needs to be developed. Unfortunately, there are limited data456 Chapter 16 The Dynamics of Soil Organic Matter
P run off
P sedimentP leachingFertilizer
PGrain P
Stalk P
Root POrganic P
(animal
waste)
Stable
organic
soil PFresh
organic
soil PLabile
inorganic
soil PActive
inorganic
soil PStable
inorganic
soil P
FIGURE 16.9 The structure of the GLEAMS P submodel for soil phosphorous dynamics (with
permission from Lewis and McGechan, 2002).Ch16-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  7:13 PM  Page 456
available to describe the critical process represented in P cycling models, thus
limiting the accuracy of existing and new P cycling models.
ECOSYSTEM MODELS: INTERACTIONS OF NUTRIENT
CYCLING AND SOM DYNAMICS
The initial computer models of SOM dynamics were expanded in the 1980s to
include nutrient cycling and plant production submodels. The most recentlydeveloped SOM models are capable of simulating losses of nutrients from leach-ing of NO
3/H11002and dissolved organic matter and nitrogen gas losses (N 2O, N 2, and NO x)
from nitriﬁcation and denitriﬁcation. These models have also been incorporatedinto long-term models of soil development (500,000 to 4 million years), whichinclude plant production, soil N and P dynamics, and SOM dynamics. Applied toa scenario in the humid tropics, the century model correctly demonstrated that N isthe primary limiting factor for plant growth during early soil development (20,000to 300,000 years), while P limits plant growth for old soils ( /H11022550,000 years).
Ecosystem-level models are generally a hierarchical construction of model
subcomponents (Fig. 16.10). Each of the model subcomponents can consist of amodel representing more detailed processes. The ﬁgure demonstrates that micro-bial transformations have a big impact on available soil nutrients and that avail-able soil nutrients then impact nutrient uptake by the plants, which modiﬁes plantproduction and crop yields. Climate, land use, and soil physical information aredrivers for plant production, soil water transport, and microbial transformations.The hierarchical construction provides a means of connecting various componentsinto a single cohesive model that can examine the large number of interacting param-eters required to examine processes at large spatial and temporal scales. However,the complexity of the agroecosystem models can make it difﬁcult to verify that theresults are reasonable. For example, the failure of the model to properly simulatedenitriﬁcation N
2O and N 2gas ﬂuxes can result from an error in estimating plant
demand for NO 3and NH 4, and net uptake of NO 3and NH 4by soil microbes, or errors
in simulating soil water content. Generally, models that are applied at larger spatialand temporal scales use input data of lower resolution; therefore errors in estimatingthe validity of model output are not easily scaled up and become difﬁcult to estimate.
Both data and modeling studies show that there are strong interactions between
nutrient availability and SOM dynamics. The Century model can simulate theinteractions among plant production, nutrient cycling, and SOM dynamics.Paustian et al. (1992) used ﬁeld-plot data from a 40-year agricultural experiment
in Sweden (see Table 16.5) to test the Century model and demonstrate the inter-active impact of adding different types of organic matter (sawdust, green manure,farmyard manure, and straw) and inorganic fertilizer on plant production andnutrient uptake, nutrient cycling, and SOM dynamics. The results for the low Ncontent ( /H110210.5% N) organic additions (straw and sawdust) show that there is a
decrease in plant N uptake for sawdust and no change for straw, while soil N andC levels are higher compared to the control treatment (no addition). The decreasedModeling the Dynamics of Decomposition 457Ch16-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  7:13 PM  Page 457
plant production with sawdust addition is a result of immobilization of N. Adding
inorganic N fertilizer causes plant production and N uptake to be increasedby/H1102290%, while soil C and N are increased relative to the no-addition control
(lower increases compared to the straw and sawdust treatment). The increased soil458 Chapter 16 The Dynamics of Soil Organic Matter
Economic
modelLand-use
databases
Agroecosystem subsystem
SOIL SUBSYSTEM MODELAGROECOSYSTEM MODELREGIONAL/GLOBAL MODEL
MICROBIAL TRANSFORMATIONS MODELMicroclimate
subsystemCrop
subsystem
Groundwater
subsystemSoil subsystem
Microbial
TransformationsChemical
Transformations
Soil–water & nitrogen
transport
Soil–Water
uptakeNitrogen
uptake
Dinitrogen
Ammonium NitratePassive
Organic-NActive
Organic-Nk1
k3k2k4k5
FIGURE 16.10 An example of the hierarchy of submodels used in the construction of complex
predictive models for regional and global scales (with permission from Paustian, 2001; Rao et al. , 1982).Ch16-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  7:13 PM  Page 458
C and N levels result from increases in root C inputs. The high-N-content organic
additions (farmyard manure and green manure) result in large increases in plantproduction and N uptake and substantial increases in soil C and N levels. Approxi-
mately 40% of the added N from the inorganic fertilizer and high-N organic addi-tions goes into increased plant N uptake, while organic N additions result in greater
stabilization of N in the soil (40% vs 20% for inorganic N fertilizer). Comparisonof model results with observed data is quite favorable; however, more informationwill be needed to accurately predict the role of SOM in controlling global CO
2
levels.
ESTABLISHING POOL SIZES AND
KINETIC CONSTANTS
The various forms of organic matter in the soil–plant system and the complex
changes that it undergoes can be rationalized using a pool structure. A pool can bedeﬁned as a compartment containing material of unique and uniform composi-tion. An example of biological and chemical pool sizes can be found in the analy-sis of two Swedish agricultural systems (Table 16.6). The standing crop of barleyfertilized with 120 kg N ha
/H110021is greater than that of alfalfa, but the primary pro-
duction of alfalfa is greater when one considers both the two harvests per annumand the root turnover in the alfalfa crop. The shoot-to-root ratio of 6:1 for barleyis typical of many agricultural crops. The perennial alfalfa with more roots thanshoots is representative of perennial crops. The microbial biomass is equivalent toabout 50% of the weight of the plant standing crop and greatly exceeds the meta-zoan biomass. The uncultivated alfalfa has a soil fauna biomass of 105 kg C ha
/H110021
compared to the 55 kg C ha/H110021in the barley ﬁeld. The soil organisms account for
slightly more than 3% of the total soil C in both systems, and direct microscopyof the bacteria and fungi shows the predominance of fungal biomass. The annualC balance of the two systems (Table 16.7) shows the root respiration as 11–12%Establishing Pool Sizes and Kinetic Constants 459
TABLE 16.5 Observed versus Simulated Plant N Uptake and Change in Soil N and C
(1990–1956) for Different Organic Matter Management Practices for a Site in Swedena
No Fertilizer Green Farm
Fallow amendment N Straw manure manure Sawdust
Plant N uptake 4.7 9.4 4.7 8.7 6.9 3.6 
(g N m/H110022) (4.1) (9.3) (4.0) (8.6) (7.3) (2.1)
Change in soil /H11002100 /H1100256 /H1100225 /H110016 /H1100138 /H11001119 /H1100125 
N (g N m/H110022)( /H1100297) ( /H1100285) ( /H1100235) ( /H1100212) ( /H1100152) ( /H1100148) ( /H1100146)
Change in soil /H11002700 /H11002800 /H11002200 0.0 /H11001300 /H110011000 /H11001500 
C (g C m/H110022)( /H11002720) ( /H11002790) ( /H11002250) ( /H11001300) ( /H11001500) ( /H11001950) ( /H11001560)
aSimulated values were generated by the Century model and are presented in parentheses. With
permission from Paustian et al. (1992).Ch16-P546807.qxd  11/18/06  7:13 PM  Page 459
